About IITM 
About IIT Madras Indian Institute of Technology Madras is one of the foremost institutes of national importance for higher technical education and research. In 1956, the German Government offered technical assistance in establishing an institute of higher education in engineering in India. The first Indo-German agreement in Bonn, West Germany for the establishment of the Indian Institute of Technology at Madras was signed in 1959. The Institute was formally inaugurated in 1959 by Prof. Humayun Kabir, Union Minister for Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs. The IIT system has twenty three Institutes of Technology. The first of these to be instituted are at Kharagpur (estb. 1951), Mumbai (estb. 1958), Chennai (estb. 1959), Kanpur (estb. 1959), Delhi (estb. 1961), Guwahati (estb. 1994) and Roorkee (estb. 1847, joined IITs in 2001). The Institute has sixteen academic departments and several advanced research centres in various disciplines of engineering and pure sciences. A faculty of international repute, a brilliant student community, excellent technical & supporting staff and an effective administration have all contributed to the pre-eminent status of IIT Madras. The campus is located in the city of Chennai, previously known as Madras. Chennai is the state capital of Tamil Nadu, a southern state in India. Contact Us Indian Institute of Technology Madras IIT P.O., Chennai 600 036 INDIA 
 
 
 
Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Home About IITM About IIT Madras Indian Institute of Technology Madras is one of the foremost
            institutes of national importance for higher technical education and
            research. In 1956, the German Government offered technical assistance in
            establishing an institute of higher education in engineering in
            India. The first Indo-German agreement in Bonn, West Germany for the
            establishment of the Indian Institute of Technology at Madras was
            signed in 1959. The Institute was formally inaugurated in 1959 by Prof. Humayun
            Kabir, Union Minister for Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs.
            The IIT system has twenty three Institutes of Technology. The first
            of these to be instituted are at Kharagpur (estb. 1951), Mumbai
            (estb. 1958), Chennai (estb. 1959), Kanpur (estb. 1959), Delhi
            (estb. 1961), Guwahati (estb. 1994) and Roorkee (estb. 1847, joined
            IITs in 2001). The Institute has sixteen academic departments and several advanced
            research centres in various disciplines of engineering and pure
            sciences. A faculty of international repute, a brilliant student
            community, excellent technical & supporting staff and an effective
            administration have all contributed to the pre-eminent status of IIT
            Madras. The campus is located in the city of Chennai, previously
            known as Madras. Chennai is the state capital of Tamil Nadu, a
            southern state in India. IITM’s Experience in Online Education IITM is well-equipped to provide an online diploma program. We have
            been ranked number 1 Engineering Institute for the past 5 years and
            we have been ranked number 1 Overall for the past 2 years by NIRF. Furthermore, IITM began the NPTEL program, the country’s first
            online content portal as an inter-IIT consortium project in 2001 and nptel.ac.in is
            one of the largest online course portals in the world. In 2014, IITM
            also created NPTEL online courses - the country’s first Massive Open
            Online Course (MOOC). Today, NPTEL is considered the largest MOOC
            provider in India. MHRD launched the SWAYAM MOOC platform in 2017 and NPTEL has been
            the largest contributor to it. NPTEL also manages the national MOOCs
            portal - swayam.gov.in as well as the network of more than 3800 SWAYAM local chapter
            colleges. With IITM continuing to lead the NPTEL project, it makes
            them the perfect choice to offer an online diploma program. Relevant Links www.iitm.ac.in 
 Contact Us IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR
                Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 For any queries, please reach out to us through one of the following modes:
 
                Please email support-diploma@study.iitm.ac.in - Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods. We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
 
                You might also reach us over phone at 7850999966. Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times. In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
 
Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Home Academics Term Structure Every year is divided into three terms of four months each - January Term, May Term and September Term. Each term of four months has 12 weeks of coursework (video lectures and assignments), 2 in-person invigilated
                        Quizzes and End Term Exams. Course Registrations In each term, learner may register for upto 4 courses. Foundational courses: The learners must register for the following two
                        Foundational courses in the first term. Additionally, the candidate may choose to register for one or two more
                        courses in the first term. Diploma in Programming: Computational Thinking and Programming in Python Diploma in Data Science: Mathematics for Data Science II and Statistics for Data Science II Projects: Two of the courses have a project component of 2 credits each.
                            Learners registering for these courses will automatically be registered for the respective projects. These
                            projects can be completed alongside their theory courses or in a later term. Diploma in Programming: Modern Application Development I - Project and Modern Application Development II - Project Diploma in Data Science: Business Data Management - Project and Machine Learning Practice - Project Assessments There are 3 types of assessments for each course: online Weekly Assignments monthly in-person Quizzes in-person End Term Exam In addition, assessments may include projects, programming exams and vivas. Exam Cities The Invigilated Quizzes and End Term exams are conducted in a number of cities spread across India. The map shows
                        our current Exam Cities List. View List Students residing/physically present in India on exam day All students residing in India or physically present in India on the day of an in-centre exam must write exams at one of the exam centres in india. Learners based outside India We also conduct in-person exams in Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman and UAE. Learners based out of other countries will be allowed to take up remote proctored exams. On exam day, students writing such internet based exams will be asked to pin the location exam is being taken
                            from. If any overseas students are planning to be in India on exam day, it is the student's responsibility to notify us
                        ahead of time so that we can arrange for you to write the exam(s) in one of the exam centres in india; hall tickets
                        will also be issued suitably. If any of these norms are violated, it will be considered as malpractice. Exam results
                        may be withheld pending investigation and findings of the exam committee. Note: Additional Exam Fee applies for all learners opting to write exams outside India. If you reside outside India and cannot find a centre in your city / country, please write to ge@study.iitm.ac.in for assistance. Exam Cities List Bahrain Manama Kuwait Salmiya Oman Muscat Singapore Singapore Sri Lanka Colombo Jaffna UAE Dubai Hamdan (AUH) Sharjah Andaman And Nicobar Islands Port Blair Andhra Pradesh Anantapur Bhimavaram Guntur Kadapa Kurnool Rajahmundry Tirupathi Vijayawada Vishakhapatnam Arunachal Pradesh Naharlagun Assam Dibrugarh Guwahati Silchar Tezpur Bihar Patna Bhagalpur Gaya Muzaffarpur Darbhanga Chhattisgarh Raipur Delhi Delhi Goa Panaji Gujarat Ahmedabad Anand Rajkot Surat Vadodara Haryana Faridabad Gurgaon Kurukshetra Himachal Pradesh Hamirpur Shimla Jammu and Kashmir Jammu Srinagar Jharkhand Dhanbad Jamshedpur Ranchi Karnataka Belgaum Bengaluru Dharwad Gulbarga Mangalore Mysore Kerala Calicut Ernakulam Kollam Kottayam Palakkad Thrissur Trivandrum Madhya Pradesh Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Maharashtra Amravati Aurangabad Jalgaon Kolhapur Mumbai Nagpur Nanded Nashik Pune Solapur Manipur Imphal Meghalaya Shillong Mizoram Aizawl Nagaland Dimapur Odisha Bhubaneswar Rourkela Sambalpur Puducherry Puducherry Punjab Chandigarh Jalandhar Ludhiana Amritsar Rajasthan Jaipur Jodhpur Kota Udaipur Sikkim Bardang Tamil Nadu Chennai-Avadi Chennai-South Coimbatore Erode Kanchipuram Madurai Salem Thanjavur Tiruchirappalli Tirunelveli Vellore Telangana Hyderabad Warangal Tripura Agartala Uttar Pradesh Agra Allahabad Ghaziabad Gorakhpur Greater Noida Kanpur Lucknow Meerut Varanasi Uttarakhand Dehradun Haldwani Roorkee West Bengal Aasansol Adisaptagram Durgapur Kolkata Siliguri Close Fee Structure For details about application fees, check Application Process section in Admissions page. Each term, pay only for the courses you register for in that specific term. Foundational courses - ₹4,000 per course Diploma in Programming: Computational Thinking; Programming in Python Diploma in Data Science: Mathematics for Data Science II; Statistics for Data Science II Skill Enhancement courses - ₹7,500 per course. Diploma in Programming: System Commands Diploma in Data Science: Tools in Data Science All other Diploma courses - ₹10,000 per course Projects - ₹2,500 per project Diploma in Programming: Modern Application Development I - Project; Modern Application Development
                            II - Project Diploma in Data Science: Business Data Management - Project; Machine Learning Practice -
                            Project Additional Exam Fee will apply ONLY for learners
                taking our courses from outside India. Fee waivers depend on the socio-economic background of the learner. Family Income > 5 LPA Family Income > 1 LPA and <= 5 LPA Family Income <= 1 LPA Fees Docs Required Fees Docs Required Fees Docs Required General Full Fee NIL 50% waiver EWS + Family Income 75% waiver EWS + Family Income OBC Full Fee NIL 50% waiver OBC-NCL + Family Income 75% waiver OBC-NCL + Family Income SC / ST 50% waiver SC / ST 50% waiver SC / ST 75% waiver SC / ST + Family Income PwD 50% waiver PwD 50% waiver PwD 75% waiver PwD + EWS / OBC-NCL + Family Income SC / ST + PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD *Fee waiver is not be applicable for the International students. The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of the
                    candidate, the income of his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her siblings and children below the age of
                    18 years. family income certificate is not required while applying for Diploma program, but will be required to avail
                    fee weiver when joining the program. Download Family income Certificate format OBC-NCL / EWS certificate, if applicable, need to be obtained in following format while applying. Download OBC-NCL Certificate format Download EWS Certificate format Diploma in Programming Computational Thinking Foundational course 4 credits Details Programming in Python Foundational course 4 credits Details Database Management Systems Programming course 4 credits Details Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python Programming course 4 credits Details Modern Application Development I Programming course 4 credits Details Modern Application Development I - Project Project 2 credits Details Programming Concepts using Java Programming course 4 credits Details Modern Application Development II Programming course 4 credits Details Modern Application Development II - Project Project 2 credits Details System Commands Skill Enhancement course 3 credits Details Diploma in Data Science Mathematics for Data Science II Foundational course 4 credits Details Statistics for Data Science II Foundational course 4 credits Details Machine Learning Foundations Data Science course 4 credits Details Business Data Management Data Science course 4 credits Details Business Data Management - Project Project 2 credits Details Machine Learning Techniques Data Science course 4 credits Details Machine Learning Practice Data Science course 4 credits Details Machine Learning Practice - Project Project 2 credits Details Business Analytics Data Science course 4 credits Details Tools in Data Science Skill Enhancement course 3 credits Details
 
Admissions - Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN e Admissions Eligibility completed any UG degree through any mode or completed at least two years of any UG degree through any mode
            before September 2024. Mandatory Requirements to Enroll and Learn Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop/desktop
            device will be a key requirement to learn effectively from our
            courses. For a complete list of software and hardware
            requirements, please refer to this document - Mandatory System Specifications. Learner should be able to travel to assigned exam centres for
            quizzes and exams each term. Check the exam cities section in the Academics page to see where our exam centres are
            currently located. Application Process Application form for the batch starting September 2024 is currently open. Click here to apply. Anyone who is eligible may apply by filling in the application
              form, uploading required documents , and paying the application fee. General Category / OBC Applicant ₹6000 application fee SC / ST Category / PwD (>= 40% disablity ) Applicant ₹3000 application fee SC / ST Category Applicant who is ALSO PwD (>= 40%
                    disablity ) ₹1500 application fee All applicants should attend the in-person Qualifier Exam and
                obtain the minimum required cutoff marks to join the program. Within India: Exams are conducted in designated centres in 110+ cities
                    in an invigilated manner that candidates have to attend in
                    person. Outside India: Applicants opting to write the Qualifier Exam outside
                    India must pay an additional exam fee. In countries where
                    we have exam centres, candidates will write exams in
                    person at these centres, else they will appear for remote
                    proctored online exams. Qualifier Exam Qualifier Exam for Diploma in Programming Subjects: English, Aptitude,
              and Basic Mathematics Duration: 3 hours Click here to view detailed syllabus, reference videos and mock question
              papers. Qualifier Exam for Diploma in Data Science Subjects: English,
              Programming in Python, Mathematics, and Statistics Duration: 4 hours Click here to view detailed syllabus, reference videos and mock question
              papers. Qualifying Criteria To pass the Diploma Qualifier Exam, the learner has to get a minimum Total Qualifier Exam Score and a minimum Qualifier Exam Score in each subject individually. Min. Req. Total Qualifier Exam
                  Score Min. Req. Qualifier Exam Score in each subject General Learner 50% 40% SC /ST /PwD* 40% 30% SC / ST + PwD* 40% 30% OBC-NCL / EWS* 45% 35% *Note: Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various
            categories of learners, is applicable ONLY for the qualifier exam.
            There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass criteria
            once registered into the program. Only those who pass the Qualifier Exam will be eligible to
            register for the respective Diploma Program. Learners who pass the Diploma Qualifier Exam on 01 September, 2024 will
            be eligible to register and join the program in the September 2024
            term only. International Students Are you a learner outside India interested to join this program? Are you worried about the in-person assessments? This program is open to learners from all around the globe. You
            can study from IIT Madras and earn a Diploma in programming or
            data science irrespective of the country you are from. IIT Madras is setting up modalities to conduct in-person exams in
            as many countries as possible. Currently, we conduct in-person
            exams in the following cities outside India: UAE - Dubai, Sharjah, Abu Dhabi Sri Lanka -
              Colombo, Jaffna Bahrain - Manama Students residing in these countries must write exams in the
            designated exam centres. Students have to appear for in-person
            exams roughly once a month. Learners residing in any other country, apart from those shown
            above, can also enroll for this program and appear for remote
            proctored exams. Please write to the following email id with any
            queries you might have - ge@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. Our team will
            get in touch with you and guide you on the next steps. Outside India learners who have taken exams with us till date:
              159 View detailed location of learners outside India Outside India learners who have taken exam with us till date Country Number of learners Mode of Exam BAHRAIN 2 Remote proctored CANADA 3 Remote proctored KENYA 1 Remote proctored KUWAIT 3 Remote proctored OMAN 4 Remote proctored QUATAR 8 Remote proctored SAUDI ARABIA 2 Remote proctored SINGAPORE 5 Remote proctored UNITED ARAB EMIRATES 127 "In centre: Dubai, Sharjah, Hamdan Others are remote
                    proctored" UNITED KINGDOM 1 Remote protected UNITED STATES 3 Remote protected Okay Diploma in Data Science English - Syllabus Doc - mock Question Paper Programming in Python - Syllabus Doc - Video Playlist - mock Question Paper Mathematics - Syllabus Doc - Video Playlist - mock Question Paper Statistics - Syllabus Doc - Video Playlist - mock Question Paper Computational Thinking (will not be included in exam syllabus. Given just for your
                reference) - Syllabus Doc - Video Playlist - mock Question Paper Diploma in Programming English - Syllabus Doc - mock Question Paper Aptitude - mock Question Paper Basic Mathematics - Syllabus Doc - Video Playlist - mock Question Paper Required Documents to apply 1. Passport size photograph (JPEG / JPG format) 50KB-150KB 2. Signature (JPEG / JPEG format) 4KB-150KB 3. Photo ID Card Scan - Aadhar Card / PAN Card / Passport /
                Voter ID / Driving License / 12th Admit card with photo /
                other Government ID with photo (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 4. Category Certificate - only for applicants who select SC /
                ST / OBC-NCL* / EWS (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 5. PwD Certificate - only for applicants with 40% or more
                disability (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 6. Proof of applicant having been permanently disabled OR
                parent having been permanently disable / killed during war or
                peacetime operations while serving as a defence / paramilitary
                personnel. - if applicable (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. *Note that BC / OBC certificate is not the same as OBC-NCL
                (Other Backward Caste - Non Creamy Layer) certificate. Only
                applicants belonging to OBC caste as listed in Central
                Government’s www.ncbc.nic.in website and also belonging to Non
                Creamy Layer may apply in the “OBC-NCL” category. Other BC /
                OBC applicants must apply in the “General” category. Download OBC-NCL Certificate format Download EWS Certificate format Okay Contact Us IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR
                Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 For any queries, please reach out to us through one of the following modes:
 
                Please email support-diploma@study.iitm.ac.in - Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods. We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
 
                You might also reach us over phone at 7850999966. Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times. In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program. © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Privacy Policy | Terms of Service | Code of Conduct | Honour Code Code of Conduct Effective Date: 04/10/2021 We, the employees of IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES hold our work and
        activities in the promotion of online education with very high regard.
        For this purpose, we will maintain the highest standards of integrity,
        responsible behavior, and ethical and professional conduct. We agree to
        be bound by the following rules: Be respectful of others ● We will respect others, including IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES
        employees, and will act in a professional manner while participating in
        its activities. ● We will respect the privacy of others and the protection of their
        personal information and data. Treat people fairly ● We will not engage in harassment of any kind, including sexual
        harassment, or bullying behavior whether in person, via cybertechnology
        or otherwise. ● We will not discriminate against any person because of characteristics
        protected by law (e.g., age, ancestry, color, disability or handicap,
        national origin, race, religion, gender, sexual or affectional
        orientation, gender identity, gender expression, appearance,
        matriculation, political affiliation, marital status, social or
        professional status). Refrain from retaliation ● We will not retaliate against any IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES
        employee or other person who reports an act of misconduct, or who
        reports any violation of this Code of Conduct. ● We will not retaliate against any person who makes IIT Madras DIPLOMA
        PROGRAMMES aware of the violation of any laws, rules or regulations in
        connection with IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES activities. Comply with applicable laws By submitting or distributing your User Postings, you hereby grant to
        IIT Madras (as described below) a worldwide, non-exclusive,
        transferable, assignable, sub licensable, fully paid-up, royalty-free,
        perpetual, irrevocable right and license to host, transfer, display,
        perform, reproduce, modify, distribute, redistribute, relicense, and
        otherwise use, make available, and exploit your User Postings, in whole
        or in part, in any form and in any media formats and through any media
        channels (now known or hereafter developed) Certificates / Diplomas and Other Products & Services General We will comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations governing
        IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES’s business conduct and all relevant
        procedures established by IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES whenever and
        wherever we are participating in IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES
        activities, including but not limited to the following: ●
        Rejecting bribery in all forms. ● Avoiding real or perceived
        conflicts of interest whenever possible, and disclosing them to affected
        parties when they do exist. ● Protecting confidential information belonging to IIT Madras DIPLOMA
        PROGRAMMES and personal information belonging to IIT Madras DIPLOMA
        PROGRAMMES employees and other persons. ● Not misusing or infringing the intellectual property of others. Contact Us IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR
                Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 For any queries, please reach out to us through one of the following modes:
 
                Please email support-diploma@study.iitm.ac.in - Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods. We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
 
                You might also reach us over phone at 7850999966. Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times. In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program. © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\honour_code.html
 
Code of conduct 
 
Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Privacy Policy | Terms of Service | Code of Conduct | Honour Code Honour Code Effective Date: 04/10/2021 In order to participate in IIT Madras diploma programmes, you must agree to the Honor Code given below
            and any additional terms specific to a course or program. This Honor Code, and any additional terms, will be
            posted on our website - diploma.iitm.ac.in. Honour Code Pledge By registering in an IIT Madras Diploma programme, I agree that I will: ● Complete all
            tests
            and assignments on my own, unless collaboration on an assignment is explicitly permitted. ●
            Maintain
            only one user account, unless IIT Madras has approved the use of a separate user account in connection with
            an employer-sponsored or university-sponsored program. ● Not let anyone else use my username
            and/or
            password. ● Not engage in any activity that would dishonestly improve my results, or improve or
            hurt the results of others. ● Not engage in any activity that will cause grief or harm to the
            diploma programmes websites/portals or study materials, including activities like hacking or accessing restricted
            materials. ● Not post answers to problems that are being used to assess learner performance
            either
            inside the course forums or in any other website. ● Not resubmit or submit work (in identical or
            similar form) for multiple assignments without prior explicit approval. ● Not submit false or
            altered or fabricated admission documents including signatures or certificates of enrollment or standing,
            registration forms, and medical certifications. Violations If you are found in violation of the Terms of Service or Honor Code, you may be subject to one or more of
            the
            following actions: ● Receiving a zero or no credit for an assignment; ● Having any
            certificate/degree earned in the course or programme withheld or revoked; ● Being unenrolled
            from a course or programme; or ● Termination of your use of the IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES
            Site. ● Additional actions may be taken at the sole discretion of IIT Madras. ● No refunds will be
            issued
            in the case of any corrective action for such violations. Honor Code violations will be
            determined
            at the sole discretion of IIT Madras. You will be notified if a determination has been made that you have
            violated
            this Honor Code and you will be informed of the corresponding action that will be taken as a result of the
            violation. Changing the Honour Code Please note that we review and may make changes to this Honor Code from time to time. Any changes to this
            Honor Code will be effective immediately upon posting on diploma.iitm.ac.in page, with an updated
            effective
            date. By accessing the IIT Madras DIPLOMA PROGRAMMES Site after any changes have been made, you signify your
            agreement
            on a prospective basis to the modified Honor Code and any changes contained therein. Be sure to return to
            this page periodically to ensure familiarity with the most current version of this Honor Code. 
 
Eligibility Anyone interested with at least two years of any UG
                                    education. Coursework 8 theory courses, plus hands-on training through 2 projects. Flexibility Learn at your own pace, from anywhere, within or outside
                                    India. Skills Exit the program as a certified programmer or data scientist. Learn from the best IIT Madras is an Institute of Eminence. Ranked No.1 in the 'Overall' Category for three consecutive years and ranked No.1 in
                                    the 'Engineering Institutions' Category for six consecutive years by NIRF. Open to anyone who has
                                        completed any UG degree or at least two years of any UG degree through any mode. Need NOT have an
                                        engineering or computer
                                        science background. Students, working
                                        professionals, job seekers and anyone else
                                        interested can apply. Improve your
                                        employability and advance your career. Carefully designed
                                        courses by experienced
                                        faculty. About the Program IIT Madras is offering Diplomas in Programming and Data Science for college
                    students, working professionals and job seekers who aim to build a career in these domains. The
                    convenience of online learning combined with in-person assessments makes the program flexible and
                    affordable while retaining the exceptional quality of learning that IIT Madras stands for.
                    Currently, the following diplomas are being offered: Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Diploma in Programming Apply now Full Stack Development Programming in Java Programming in Python Advanced SQL Database Design Develop Web Applications Develop APIs Fee: ₹70,500 Upto 75% fee waivers available Duration: 8 months* Coursework: 8 courses + 2 projects View list of
                                    courses Diploma in Data Science Apply now Predictive Analytics Machine Learning Techniques Data Visualization Tools Statistical Modeling Business Analytics Python Programming Libraries like Scikit-learn and TensorFlow Fee: ₹70,500 Upto 75% fee waivers available Duration: 8 months* Coursework: 8 courses + 2 projects View list of
                                        courses *shortest
                        possible duration Diploma Qualifier Exam Exam Date: 01 September, 2024 Applicants must attend the in-person Diploma Qualifier Exam at an exam centre. Those who
                                clear this exam will be allowed to register and join the program. Classes start on 20 Sep, 2024. Syllabus for the Exam : Refer section in Admissions page Wish to learn the basics and pursue a BS Degree in Programming and Data Science from IIT
                            Madras? Go to our study.iitm.ac.in website Important Dates Contact Us IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR
                Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 For any queries, please reach out to us through one of the following modes:
 
                Please email support-diploma@study.iitm.ac.in - Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods. We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
 
                You might also reach us over phone at 7850999966. 
Course Page -  BSCS1001 Computational Thinking The students will be introduced to a number of programming concepts using illustrative examples which will be solved almost entirely manually. The manual execution of each solution allows for close inspection of the concepts being discussed. by Madhavan Mukund , G Venkatesh Course ID: BSCS1001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Applying a procedural approach to real life problems: sequencing basic steps, identifying common patterns. Communicating procedural descriptions: flowcharts, pseudo-code. Understanding underlying abstractions used in programming, through examples: variables, iteration, accumulation, filtering, parametrised procedures, polymorphism and state. Selecting appropriate data structures to store relationships between data: lists, trees, matrices, graphs. Identifying algorithmic techniques to solve a given problem: searching, sorting, indexing, matching. Decomposing problems into smaller units to find a solution: recursion, divide and conquer. Understanding and checking algorithms: predict their behaviour, design tests to verify their output, perform simple debugging. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Variables, Initialization, Iterators, Filtering, Datatypes, Flowcharts, Sanity of data WEEK 2 Iteration, Filtering, Selection, Pseudocode, Finding max and min, AND operator WEEK 3 Multiple iterations (non-nested), Three prizes problem, Procedures, Parameters, Side effects, OR operator WEEK 4 Nested iterations, Birthday paradox, Binning WEEK 5 List, Insertion sort WEEK 6 Table, Dictionar WEEK 7 Graph, Matrix WEEK 8 Adjacency matrix, Edge labelled graph WEEK 9 Backtracking, Tree, Depth First Search (DFS), Recursion WEEK 10 Object oriented programming, Class, Object, Encapsulation, Abstraction, Information hiding, Access specifiers WEEK 11 Message passing, Remote Procedure Call (RPC), Cache memory, Parallelism, Concurrency, Polling, Preemption, Multithreading, Producer Consumer, Atomicity, Consistency, Race condition, Deadlock, Broadcasting WEEK 12 Top-down approach, Bottom-up approach, Decision tree, Numerical prediction, Behaviour analysis, Classification + Show all weeks About the Instructors Madhavan Mukund Director,
                           
                           
                           
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals. ... more He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014. In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2002 -
                                    Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python and BSCS2005 -
                                    Programming Concepts using Java G Venkatesh Professor of Practice,
                           
                           
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Venkatesh is a Professor of Practice at IIT Madras, where he is involved with several projects in the field of education. He is also a Fellow and Director of Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd, a leading Indian R&D services provider, and a founder of Mylspot, an education technology startup that aims to bridge knowledge gaps of students through a mentored learning platform. ... more Dr Venkatesh is a graduate in electronics from IIT Madras, PhD in Computer Science from TIFR, Mumbai and was a faculty member of the Computer Science & Engineering Dept of IIT Bombay for 8 years where his research interests revolved around declarative languages and their application to the design of embedded systems. He moved to the industry when Sasken was being formed, where he led their technology activities for over two decades. He was a visiting/adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore for 10 years and a Chair Professor in the department of EE at IIT Madras for 3 years. Dr. Venkatesh was elected as a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineers in 2006 and the IETE in 2012. He won the Technomentor award of the Indian Electronics and Semiconductor Association in 2013 and the Vasvik award for industrial research in 2015. Dr. Venkatesh serves on a number of government, industry and investor committees and boards in the areas of microelectronics, telecommunications and education. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSMS2001 -
                                    Business Data Management and BSMS2002 -
                                    Business Analytics 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS1002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Diploma Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Home Academics BSCS1002 Programming in Python This will be the first formal programming course that students will see in this programme. The goal of this course is to introduce Python programming, which is used throughout the programme, with a basic problem solving and algorithmic flavour. by Sudarshan Iyengar Course ID: BSCS1002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Using basic programming concepts such as variables, expressions, loops, conditionals and functions in Python Creating, manipulating, and using more Python specific features such as lists, tuples, and dictionaries Familiarising with and using common Python libraries such as random, math, datetime, scipy, matplotlib, Pandas etc Analysing real life activities and casting them as programming problems Applying programming concepts to analyse and solve diverse problems Writing Readable code and debugging it Building small applications using python Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to algorithms WEEK 2 Conditionals WEEK 3 Conditionals (Continued) WEEK 4 Iterations and Ranges WEEK 5 Iterations and Ranges (Continued) WEEK 6 Basic Collections in Python WEEK 7 Basic Collections in Python (Continued) WEEK 8 Basic Collections in Python (Continued) WEEK 9 File Operations WEEK 10 File Operations (Continued) WEEK 11 Module system in python WEEK 12 Basic Pandas and Numpy processing of data + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Title: Python for Everybody. Author: Charles R. Severance. Publisher: Shroff Publishers. ISBN: 9789352136278 (The PDF of this book is currently available freely at http://do1.dr-chuck.com/pythonlearn/EN_us/pythonlearn.pdf) About the Instructors Sudarshan Iyengar Associate Professor and Head ,
                           
                           
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Ropar Sudarshan Iyengar has a PhD from the Indian Institute of Science and is currently working as an Associate Professor and Head of CSE at IIT Ropar. less Visit website View all courses 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2001.html
BSCS2001 Database Management Systems A comprehensive introduction to databases, database management, and relevant topics like database security, integrity, concurrency, and data warehousing. by Partha Pratim Das Course ID: BSCS2001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Course Overview WEEK 2 Relational Model and Basic SQL WEEK 3 Intermediate and Advanced SQL WEEK 4 Relational Query Languages and Database Design WEEK 5 Functional Dependency and Normal Forms WEEK 6 Functional Dependency and Normal Forms (cont.) WEEK 7 Application Development WEEK 8 Storage Management WEEK 9 Indexing and Hashing WEEK 10 Transactions WEEK 11 Backup and Recovery WEEK 12 Query Optimization and Conclusion + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Database Management Systems - Abraham Silberschatz , Henry F. Korth, S. Sudarshan About the Instructors Partha Pratim Das Professor,
                           
                           
                                Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Kharagpur Dr. Das obtained his B Tech, M Tech and Ph D degrees in1984, 1985 and 1988 respectively from IIT Kharagpur. He served as a faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur from 1988 to 1998. In 1998, he moved to the Industry and served in Senior Director positions. In 2011, Dr. Das joined back the Department as a Professor. He is the Joint PI of National Digital Library of India project of MoE and leads the national initiative to integrate the digital learning contents. ... more Dr. Das is a regular contributor to the SWAYAM Program and his courses on Programming in C++, Object Oriented Analysis and Design, and Data Base Management Systems have been attended by thousands of students since 2017. Over the last decade he has been teaching Compilers, Software Engineering, Image Processing, Foundations of Algorithms & Machine Learning, and Principles of Programming Languages for which he received top students’ feedback 6 times during 2014 to 2018. Dr. Das has published over 50 papers in international journals in his interest areas spanning Computer Vision, Digital Learning, Digital Geometry, Human-Computer Interaction, Medical Image Analysis, Computer Analysis of Indian Classical Dance, and Productivity in Software Engineering. less View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2002.html
Course Page  BSCS2002 Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python A good foundation course to introduce basic concepts in the design and analysis of algorithms as well as standard data structures, using Python as a base language for implementing these. by Madhavan Mukund Course ID: BSCS2002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Python Refresher Complexity, Notations, Sorting and Searching Algorithms Arrays, Lists, Stacks, Queues, Hashing Graph Algorithms Graph Algorithms (Continued) Union-Find Data Structure, Priority Queue, Heap, Binary Search Tree Balanced Search Tree, Greedy Algorithms Divide and Conquer Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Dynamic Programming WEEK 2 String or Pattern Matching Algorithms WEEK 3 Network Flows, Linear Programming, Class of Algorithms WEEK 4 Summary WEEK 5 Graph Algorithms WEEK 6 Graph Algorithms (Continued) WEEK 7 Divide and Conquer WEEK 8 Abstract datatypes WEEK 9 Abstract datatypes (Continued) WEEK 10 Dynamic programming WEEK 11 Dynamic programming (Continued) WEEK 12 Network flows and linear programming + Show all weeks About the Instructors Madhavan Mukund Director,
                           
                           
                           
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals. ... more He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014. In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking and BSCS2005 -
                                    Programming Concepts using Java View all courses
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2003.html
 BSCS2003 Modern Application Development I Building a modern application involves many different aspects: front end, recording transactions, storage, connecting to a remote server, using APIs etc. The courses Modern Application Development I and II go through all these aspects through a detailed and evolving case study, teaching the relevant programming skills as the course progresses. by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2003 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Recommended Co-requisites: BSCS2001 -  Database Management Systems What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS To be able to design a web application To be able to distinguish between the frontend, the backend, and the database activities To create such an application with Python and MySQL Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Basic terminologies of Web WEEK 2 Webpages written in HTML and CSS WEEK 3 Presentation layer - View WEEK 4 Models - Introduction to databases WEEK 5 Controllers - Business logic WEEK 6 APIs and REST APIs WEEK 7 Backend Systems WEEK 8 Application Frontend WEEK 9 Application Security WEEK 10 Testing of Web Applications WEEK 11 HTML Evolution and Beyond HTML WEEK 12 Application Deployment + Show all weeks About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
                           
                           
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II View all courses 
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2003P.html
BSCS2003P Modern Application Development I - Project "Modern Application Development - I project" is a comprehensive course designed to introduce learners to the fundamentals of web application development. The course covers essential technologies such as HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Flask, API implementation, and SQLite for data storage. Learners will gain practical knowledge in building secure, efficient, and deployable web applications while understanding key concepts in web development. by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2003P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Recommended Co-requisites: BSCS2003 -  Modern Application Development I Project Course Overview The objective of this course project is to provide hands-on experience in developing a web application from scratch, integrating various technologies taught throughout the course. Students will apply their knowledge to create a functional web application that incorporates secure authentication, efficient data management, and API integration. The project aims to reinforce understanding of key concepts, foster problem-solving skills, and enhance proficiency in web application development. What you’ll learn Upon completing this course project, learners will acquire proficiency in HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Flask, and SQLite, enabling them to develop robust web applications. Students will gain practical experience in implementing secure authentication mechanisms, optimizing application performance, and integrating APIs to enhance functionality. The project will equip learners with skills in deploying web applications, considering security measures, and ensuring efficient data storage and retrieval. Best Projects Puneet Bhagat (21f1004363@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Aniket Kalra (21f3002102@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project ANABIL KANUNGOE (21f1003580@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Rahul Kurian Jacob (21f1000481@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Rajashree Das (21f1003047@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
                           
                           
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II View all courses 
 
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2004.html
BSCS2004 Machine Learning Foundations This course lays the groundwork for the upcoming ML courses by covering various fundamentals that do not necessarily fall under Machine Learning but are quite necessary for a comprehensive understanding of Machine Learning. by Harish Guruprasad Ramaswamy , Arun Rajkumar , Prashanth LA Course ID: BSCS2004 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Recognising if a particular problem can be viewed as a Machine Learning problem. Breaking down standard Machine Learning problems into more fundamental problems using tools from Calculus, Linear Algebra, Probability and Optimisation. Recognising relationships between equation solving, projection onto a subspace, and the supervised learning problem of linear least squares regression. Visualising eigenvalue/eigenvectors as a property of a matrix, and recognising its potential in practical unsupervised learning problems like dimensionality reduction and image compression. Using, identifying failure modes, programming and debugging simple gradient descent methods for solving unconstrained optimisation problems. Recognising the value of simple models like Gaussian mixture models for data, constructing algorithms for learning the parameters of such models, and interpreting these parameters. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to machine learning WEEK 2 Calculus WEEK 3 Linear Algebra - Least Squares Regression WEEK 4 Linear Algebra - Eigenvalues and eigenvectors WEEK 5 Linear Algebra - Symmetric matrices WEEK 6 Linear Algebra - Singular value decomposition, Principal Component Analysis in Image Processing WEEK 7 Unconstrained Optimisation WEEK 8 Convex sets, functions, and optimisation problems WEEK 9 Constrained Optimisation and Lagrange Multipliers. Logistic regression as an optimization problem WEEK 10 Examples of probabilistic models in machine learning problems WEEK 11 Exponential Family of distributions WEEK 12 Parameter estimation. Expectation Maximization. + Show all weeks About the Instructors Harish Guruprasad Ramaswamy Assistant Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I am currently an assistant professor at the computer science and engineering (CSE) department of IIT Madras. My primary areas of interest are in machine learning, statistical learning theory and optimisation. I was previously a research scientist at IBM research labs and a post-doc at University of Michigan. I completed my PhD at the Computer Science and Automation (CSA) department of the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore advised by Prof. Shivani Agarwal. I have been fortunate to work with Profs. Ambuj Tewari and Clayton Scott during my PhD and postdoc. Earlier, I finished my M.E. under the supervision of Prof. Chiranjib Bhattacharyya. less Visit website Arun Rajkumar Assistant Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I am currently an Assistant Professor at the Computer Science and Engineering department of IIT Madras. Prior to joining IIT Madras, I was a research scientist at the Xerox Research Center (now Conduent Labs), Bangalore for three years. I earned my Ph.D from the Indian Institute of Science where I worked on 'Ranking from Pairwise Comparisons'. My research interests are in the areas of Machine learning, statistical learning theory with applications to education and healthcare. less Visit website Prashanth LA Assistant Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prashanth L.A. is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. Prior to this, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland - College Park from 2015 to 2017 and at INRIA Lille - Team SequeL from 2012 to 2014. From 2002 to 2009, he was with Texas Instruments (India) Pvt Ltd, Bangalore, India. ... more He received his Masters and Ph.D degrees in Computer Science and Automation from Indian Institute of Science, in 2008 and 2013, respectively.  He was awarded the third prize for his Ph.D. dissertation, by the IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Society (ITSS). He is the coauthor of a book entitled `Stochastic Recursive Algorithms for Optimization: Simultaneous Perturbation Methods', published by Springer in 2013. His research interests are in reinforcement learning, simulation optimization and multi-armed bandits, with applications in transportation systems, wireless networks and recommendation systems. less Visit website View all courses
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2005.html
BSCS2005 Programming Concepts using Java This course uses Java to provide an understanding of core ideas in object oriented programming, exception handling, event driven programming, concurrent programming and functional programming. by Madhavan Mukund Course ID: BSCS2005 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Creating simple object-oriented programs in Java Understanding encapsulation, separating interface from implementation Implementing abstraction through a hierarchy of classes and objects Dealing gracefully with errors and exceptions Controlling concurrent access to data through locks, semaphores and monitors Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Class Hierarchy WEEK 2 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Inheritance, Overriding WEEK 3 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Polymorphism WEEK 4 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Abstract Classes WEEK 5 Collections. Iterators. WEEK 6 Generics. Callbacks. WEEK 7 Cloning. I/O serializations. Packages WEEK 8 Cloning. I/O serializations. Packages (Continued) WEEK 9 Exception handling WEEK 10 Concurrent programming WEEK 11 Concurrent programming (Continued) WEEK 12 Concurrent programming (Continued) + Show all weeks About the Instructors Madhavan Mukund Director,
                           
                           
                           
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals. ... more He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014. In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking and BSCS2002 -
                                    Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2006.html
 BSCS2006 Modern Application Development II Building a modern application involves many different aspects: front end, recording transactions, storage, connecting to a remote server, using APIs etc. The courses Modern Application Development I and II go through all these aspects through a detailed and evolving case study, teaching the relevant programming skills as the course progresses. by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2006 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites: BSCS2003 -  Modern Application Development I What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS To be able to build highly interactive frontends using Vue To be able to integrate the Vue frontend with the backend viva APIs To learn best practices involved in designing web APIs, and authentication mechanisms To be able to handle asynchronous backend jobs execution To be able to implement caching, and performance measurement for a web application To be able to distinguish between the frontend, the backend, and the database activities Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Basics of JavaScript WEEK 2 Advanced JavaScript WEEK 3 Introduction to Web Frontend WEEK 4 Introduction to VueJS WEEK 5 Vue with APIs WEEK 6 Advanced Vuejs WEEK 7 Advanced State Management WEEK 8 Authentication and Designing APIs WEEK 9 Asynchronous Jobs WEEK 10 Inter-Service Messaging and Webhooks WEEK 11 Performance WEEK 12 Project + Show all weeks About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
 
                           
                           
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2006P.html
BSCS2006P Modern Application Development II - Project "Modern Application Development - II project" is an advanced course designed to build upon the foundations of web application development introduced in "Modern Application Development - I." The course focuses on advanced frontend technologies, such as Vue.js, to create interactive and sophisticated user interfaces. It also covers additional concepts like token-based authentication, asynchronous task execution using Celery and Redis, caching, and security considerations.
 
The course covers some important concepts of web like Token-based Authentication, Asynchronous Task Execution with Celery and Redis, Caching Techniques. The course also talks about Security and Privacy Considerations and Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS). by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2006P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites: BSCS2003P -  Modern Application Development I - Project Recommended Co-requisites: BSCS2006 -  Modern Application Development II Project Course Overview The objective of this course project is to provide learners with hands-on experience in developing advanced web applications using Vue.js and related technologies. Students will work on building a functional web application that incorporates interactive frontend components, efficient state management using Vuex, token-based authentication for enhanced security, and asynchronous task execution using Celery and Redis. The project aims to reinforce knowledge gained in "Modern Application Development - I" and introduce advanced concepts in web development. What you’ll learn Proficiency in advanced frontend technologies such as Vue.js, Vue Router, and Vuex, enabling them to build interactive and dynamic user interfaces. Understanding and implementation of token-based authentication for secure user authentication and authorization. Knowledge and practical experience in using Celery and Redis for asynchronous task execution, improving application performance and scalability. Familiarity with caching techniques to optimize data retrieval and enhance application efficiency. Understanding of security and privacy considerations in web development, including handling CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) and ensuring secure user interactions. Best Projects JAIDEV VIVEK DESHPANDE (21f1003751@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project LOLLA AJAY KUMAR (21f1000200@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Afnan Ahmad (21f1003730@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project VIGNESHWARAN S (21f1004210@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project HIMANSHU SANJAY SINGH SEEMA (21f1003237@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
                           
                           
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2007.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Diploma Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Home Academics BSCS2007 Machine Learning Techniques To introduce the main methods and models used in machine learning problems of regression, classification and clustering. To study the properties of these models and methods and learn about their suitability for different problems. by Ashish Tendulkar Course ID: BSCS2007 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Recommended Co-requisites: BSCS2004 -  Machine Learning Foundations What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Demonstrating In depth understanding of machine learning algorithms - model, objective or loss function, optimization algorithm and evaluation criteria. Tweaking machine learning algorithms based on the outcome of experiments - what steps to take in case of underfitting and overfitting. Being able to choose among multiple algorithms for a given task. Developing an understanding of unsupervised learning techniques. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to machine learning;
Supervised vs unsupervised, batch vs online, instance-based vs model-based; Problems - regression, classification, clustering; Challenges WEEK 2 Models of regression;
Linear regression - least squares;
Polynomial regression - learning curves;
Regularized linear models - Ridge, LASSO WEEK 3 Models of regression;
Linear regression - least squares;
Polynomial regression - learning curves;
Regularized linear models - Ridge, LASSO WEEK 4 Models of classification;
Discriminant functions and decision boundaries - two classes, multiple classes, least squares, perceptron;
Probabilistic generative and discriminative models - ML, Naive Bayes, exponential family, logistic regression WEEK 5 Models of classification;
Discriminant functions and decision boundaries - two classes, multiple classes, least squares, perceptron;
Probabilistic generative and discriminative models - ML, Naive Bayes, exponential family, logistic regression WEEK 6 Models of classification;
Discriminant functions and decision boundaries - two classes, multiple classes, least squares, perceptron;
Probabilistic generative and discriminative models - ML, Naive Bayes, exponential family, logistic regression WEEK 7 Models of classification; Nearest Neighbours - regression and classification problems WEEK 8 Support Vector Machines;
Linear SVM - soft margin classification;
Nonlinear SVM - kernels WEEK 9 Decision Trees, Ensemble Methods and Random Forests;
Training decision trees, making predictions;
Bagging, Boosting WEEK 10 Decision Trees, Ensemble Methods and Random Forests;
Training decision trees, making predictions;
Bagging, Boosting WEEK 11 Clustering;
k-Means - algorithm, demo and how to select k
HAC WEEK 12 Neural networks;
Multi-layer perceptron, activation functions;
Training - SGD and back propagation;
Hyperparameters - number of layers, neurons, activation functions; Note: We will give additional material for NN and Clustering. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Pattern Classification by David G. Stork, Peter E. Hart, and Richard O. Duda Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning by Christopher M. Bishop The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction by Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman About the Instructors Ashish Tendulkar Research Software Engineer,
                           
                           
                                Google AI,
                           
                           
                            Google Dr. Ashish Tendulkar is a researcher with Google Research Bangalore. He holds Masters and PhD from IIT Bombay. Before his current position, he was an Assistant Professor at IIT Madras and Head of data sciences at Persistent Systems Pune. Ashish is passionate about teaching ML and writing AI related contents in Indian languages. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2008 -
                                    Machine Learning Practice View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2008.html
BSCS2008 Machine Learning Practice This companion course to the ML Theory course introduces the student to scikit-learn, a popular Python machine learning module, to provide hands-on problem solving experience for all the methods and models learnt in the Theory course. by Ashish Tendulkar Course ID: BSCS2008 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites: BSCS2004 -  Machine Learning Foundations BSCS2007 -  Machine Learning Techniques What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Understand the life cycle of a machine learning project - typical steps involved and tools that can be used in each step. Using machine learning algorithms to solve practical problems using libraries like scikit-learn and tensorflow. Fine tuning the algorithms through regularization, feature selection, and better models. Develop an understanding of evaluation of machine learning algorithms and decide the next steps based on the analysis. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 End-to-end machine learning project on scikit-learn WEEK 2 End-to-end machine learning project on scikit-learn (Continued) WEEK 3 Regression on scikit-learn - Linear regression
Gradient descent - batch and stochastic. WEEK 4 Polynomial regression, Regularized models WEEK 5 Logistic regression WEEK 6 Classification on scikit-learn - Binary classifier WEEK 7 Classification on scikit-learn - Multiclass classifier WEEK 8 Support Vector Machines using scikit-learn WEEK 9 Decision Trees, Ensemble Learning and Random Forests WEEK 10 Decision Trees, Ensemble Learning and Random Forests (Continued) WEEK 11 Neural networks models in scikit-learn WEEK 12 Unsupervised learning + Show all weeks About the Instructors Ashish Tendulkar Research Software Engineer,
                           
                           
                                Google AI,
                           
                           
                            Google Dr. Ashish Tendulkar is a researcher with Google Research Bangalore. He holds Masters and PhD from IIT Bombay. Before his current position, he was an Assistant Professor at IIT Madras and Head of data sciences at Persistent Systems Pune. Ashish is passionate about teaching ML and writing AI related contents in Indian languages. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2007 -
                                    Machine Learning Techniques View all courses
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSCS2008P.html
BSCS2008P Machine Learning Practice - Project The purpose of a machine learning project is to apply ML models learnt in ML courses, on real world data and to create an effective predictive model. Discover patterns in your data and then make predictions based on often complex findings to answer business questions, detect and analyze trends and help solve problems. by Ashish Tendulkar Course ID: BSCS2008P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Recommended Co-requisites: BSCS2008 -  Machine Learning Practice Project Course Overview The MLP Project is conducted on Kaggle platform. Kaggle is a well recognized platform among data science professionals that will familiarize you with many latest problems being currently solved by organizations across the world. Good place to practice your ML skills and knowledge. Looks good on your resume, especially if you have won medals and badges. The project runs for 12 to 15 weeks. The project is divided into several milestones. These milestones divide the ML cycle into smaller and manageable steps. These milestones guide you to make steady progress. What you’ll learn After completing the project you will gain experience of applying different ML techniques on real world data. You will gain proficiency in numpy, panda and sklearn libraries. You will become familiar with the 5 components of any ML project i.e. data, model, cost function, optimization and evaluation, i.e. in short, with complete end to end process of a machine learning project. In order to successfully complete the project, a viva will be conducted by an industry expert. This viva prepares you for ML interviews. About the Instructors Ashish Tendulkar Research Software Engineer,
                           
                           
                                Google AI,
                           
                           
                            Google Dr. Ashish Tendulkar is a researcher with Google Research Bangalore. He holds Masters and PhD from IIT Bombay. Before his current position, he was an Assistant Professor at IIT Madras and Head of data sciences at Persistent Systems Pune. Ashish is passionate about teaching ML and writing AI related contents in Indian languages. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2007 -
                                    Machine Learning Techniques and BSCS2008 -
                                    Machine Learning Practice View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 

BSMA1003 Mathematics for Data Science II This course aims to introduce the basic concepts of linear algebra, calculus and optimization with a focus towards the application area of machine learning and data science. by Sarang S Sane Course ID: BSMA1003 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Manipulating matrices using matrix algebra. Performing elementary row operations. Using Gaussian Elimination: Solving systems of linear equations. Find out whether a set of vectors are linearly independent. Writing down a set of dependencies in case vectors are not linearly independent. Finding subspaces along with their bases and ranks. Finding distances and angles using norms and inner products. Obtaining orthonormal basis using the Gram-Schmidt process. Finding maxima and minima of single variable functions using derivatives. Finding maxima and minima of multivariate functions using vector calculus. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Vector and matrices -        
Vectors;
Matrices;
Systems of Linear Equations;
Determinants (part 1);
Determinants (part 2) WEEK 2 Solving linear equations -        
Determinants (part 3);
Cramer's Rule;
"Solutions to a system of linear equations
with an invertible coefficient matrix";
The echelon form;
Row reduction;
The Gaussian elimination method WEEK 3 Introduction to vector spaces -        
Introduction to vector spaces;
Some properties of vector spaces;
Linear dependence;
Linear independence - Part ;
Linear independence - Part 2 WEEK 4 Basis and dimenstion -        
What is a basis for a vector space?;
Finding bases for vector spaces;
What is the rank/dimension for a vector space;
Rank and dimension using Gaussian elimination WEEK 5 Rank and Nullity of a matrix;
Introduction to Linear transformation -        
The null space of a matrix : finding nullity and a basis - Part 1;
The null space of a matrix : finding nullity and a basis - Part 2;
What is a linear mapping - Part 1;
What is a linear mapping - Part 2;
What is a linear transformation WEEK 6 Linear transformation, Kernel and Images -       
Linear transformations, ordered bases and matrices;
Image and kernel of linear transformations;
Examples of finding bases for the kernel and image of a linear transformation WEEK 7 Equivalent and Similar matrices;
Introduction to inner products -        
Equivalence and similarity of matrices;
Affine subspaces and affine mappings;
Lengths and angles;
Inner products and norms on a vector space WEEK 8 Orthogonality, Orthonormality;
Gram-schmidt method - 
Orthgonality and linear independence;
What is an orthonormal basis?
Projections using inner products;
The Gram-Schmidt process;
Orthogonal transformations and rotations WEEK 9 Multivariavle functions, Partial derivatives,
Limit, continuity and directional derivatives -        
Multivariable functions : visualization;
Partial derivatives;
Directional derivatives;
Limits for scalar-valued multivariable functions;
Continuity for multivariable functions;
Directional derivatives in terms of the gradient WEEK 10 Directional ascent and descent,
Tangent (hyper) plane,
Critical points -        
The directional of steepest ascent/descent;
Tangents for scalar-valued multivariable functions;
Finding the tangent hyper(plane);
Critical points for multivariable functions WEEK 11 Higher order partial derivatives,
Hessian Matrix and local extrema,
Differentiability -       
Higher order partial derivatives and the Hessian matrix;
The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y);
The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z);
Differentiability for Multivariable Functions;
Review of Maths - 2 + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Linear Algebra DOWNLOAD About the Instructors Sarang S Sane Assistant Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Mathematics,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I completed my B.Stat. (Hons.) and M.Stat. from the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata in 2004 and my Ph.D. from TIFR, Mumbai in 2010. I was a postdoctoral fellow in TIFR, a visiting assistant professor in the University of Kansas and very briefly an INSPIRE faculty fellow in IISc, Bengaluru before I joined the mathematics department in IITM in 2015. less Visit website View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSMA1004.html
BSMA1004 Statistics for Data Science II This second course will develop on the first course on statistics and further delve into the main statistical problems and solution approaches by Andrew Thangaraj Course ID: BSMA1004 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Recalling statistical modeling, description of data. Applying Probability distributions and related concepts to the data sets Explaining the concept of estimation of parameters. Solving the problems related to point and interval estimation. Explaining the concept of Testing of hypothesis related to mean and variance Analysing the data using simple regression models and setting up relevant hypothesis tests Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Multiple random variables - Two random variables, Multiple random variables and distributions WEEK 2 Multiple random variables - Independence, Functions of random variables - Visualization, functions of multiple random variables WEEK 3 Expectations Casino math, Expected value of a random variable, Scatter plots and spread, Variance and standard deviation, Covariance and correlation, Inequalities WEEK 4 Continuous random variables Discrete vs continuous, Weight data, Density functions, Expectations WEEK 5 Multiple continuous random variables - Height and weight data, Two continuous random variables, Averages of random variables - Colab
illustration, Limit theorems, IPL data - histograms and approximate distributions, Jointly Gaussian random variables Probability models for data - Simple models, Models based on other distributions, Models with multiple random variables, dependency, Models for IPL powerplay, Models from data WEEK 6 Refresher week WEEK 7 Estimation and Inference I WEEK 8 Estimation and Inference II WEEK 9 Bayesian estimation WEEK 10 Hypothesis testing I WEEK 11 Hypothesis Testing II WEEK 12 Revision week + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Joint Discrete Distributions (VOL 1) DOWNLOAD Joint Continuous Distributions (VOL 2) DOWNLOAD Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Probability and Statistics with Examples using R. Author: Siva Athreya, Deepayan Sarkar and Steve Tanner About the Instructors Andrew Thangaraj Professor
,
                           
                           
                                Electrical Engineering Department
,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Andrew Thangaraj received his B. Tech in Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras in 1998 and Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA in 2003. ... more He was a post-doctoral researcher at the GTL-CNRS Telecom lab at Georgia Tech Lorraine, Metz, France from Aug 2003 till May 2004. Since 2004, he has been a faculty at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, where he is currently a professor. His research interests are in the broad areas of information theory, error-control coding and information-theoretic aspects of cryptography. From Jan 2012 till Jan 2018, he served as Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Communications. From July 2018, he is an Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. From Nov 2011, he has been one of the NPTEL coordinators for IIT Madras. At NPTEL, he has played a key role in the starting of online courses and certification. He is currently a National MOOCs coordinator for NPTEL under the SWAYAM project of the MHRD. Prof. Andrew is also one of the coordinators for the IIT Madras Online BSc Degree Program, which was launched in June, 2020. less Visit website View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSMS2001.html
BSMS2001 Business Data Management A significant source of data sets and problems for data scientists will come from the business domain. This course provides a basic understanding of how businesses are organised and run from a data perspective. by G Venkatesh , Suresh Babu , Dr. Milind Gandhe Course ID: BSMS2001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Understand the business context: consumption patterns, micro-economic concepts underlying demand and supply Analyse firm-level and industry-level data Discover how businesses operate, and how they are actively managed using data dashboards Get a handle on the data that originates from business processes Identify the techniques used to represent and structure this data Gain skills on the use of worksheets to organise, interpret and present data Working with large data sets Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Consumption and demand: Micro & Macro economics: the role of data,  production, consumption and exchange, consumption baskets, sources of consumer survey data WEEK 2 Micro-economic concepts: Utility: cardinal vs ordinal, indifference curves. Demand and supply curves, changes in demand and elasticity. production cost, cost curves. Make vs buy decisions, production quantity decisions WEEK 3 Firm level strategies and performance data: Objectives and types of pricing strategies, analysis of firm performance - key ratios. Analysis examples: Ultratech, Page Industries, Nestle, TCS WEEK 4 Analysing industry level data: Industry definition and classification codes, IIP and PMI, industry market structure and concentration indices, competitive positioning in an industry - Porter's five forces. Analysis examples:  Cement industry, Textile industry, FMCG industry, IT industry WEEK 5 Case study 1 - Fabmart (E-Commerce): Introduction to E-Commerce, Fabmart case introduction, explanation of data set & questions to be answered, revenue pareto, volume pareto, scatter plot of sales and revenue, revenue trend WEEK 6 Fabmart case continued: Sales analysis, organisation of distribution centre, analysis of sales trends, average days of inventory, ledger, avoiding stockouts WEEK 7 Case study 2 - Ace Gears (Manufacturing):  Introduction to the manufacturing sector, context of the automotive industry during the years 2019-2021, explanation of data set containing monthly information on sales, production, inventory and costing. Revenue trend analysis, portfolio management WEEK 8 Ace Gears case study continued: 
Regional sales analysis, sales agent planning, production scheduling, scrap analysis, unit level profitability analysis, raw material re-ordering and safety stock WEEK 9 Case study 3 - Tech Enterprises (IT): Introduction to HR as a function, Introduction to the Tech Enterprises, internal sourcing, ranking of internal candidates, job description, sourcing channels and their analysis, recruitment process and onboarding WEEK 10 Case study 4 - PayBuddy (Fin Tech): Introduction to Finance Industry and Fintech, payment processing and money flow, new credit product introduction, nudge economics, payment transaction and customer data set, identifying rules to target the appropriate customers WEEK 11 Paybuddy case continued: Introduction to A/B testing, analysis of the  A/B testing data, credit risk evaluation, risk-return tradeoffs WEEK 12 Discussion on student acquired data sets. Wrap upaWrap up (summary) of the case studies, course project work + Show all weeks About the Instructors G Venkatesh Professor of Practice,
                           
                           
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Venkatesh is a Professor of Practice at IIT Madras, where he is involved with several projects in the field of education. He is also a Fellow and Director of Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd, a leading Indian R&D services provider, and a founder of Mylspot, an education technology startup that aims to bridge knowledge gaps of students through a mentored learning platform. ... more Dr Venkatesh is a graduate in electronics from IIT Madras, PhD in Computer Science from TIFR, Mumbai and was a faculty member of the Computer Science & Engineering Dept of IIT Bombay for 8 years where his research interests revolved around declarative languages and their application to the design of embedded systems. He moved to the industry when Sasken was being formed, where he led their technology activities for over two decades. He was a visiting/adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore for 10 years and a Chair Professor in the department of EE at IIT Madras for 3 years. Dr. Venkatesh was elected as a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineers in 2006 and the IETE in 2012. He won the Technomentor award of the Indian Electronics and Semiconductor Association in 2013 and the Vasvik award for industrial research in 2015. Dr. Venkatesh serves on a number of government, industry and investor committees and boards in the areas of microelectronics, telecommunications and education. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking and BSMS2002 -
                                    Business Analytics Suresh Babu Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Suresh Babu has completed his M.S. in Development Economics and M.Phil. in Applied Economics before completing his Ph.D. from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. He currently is a professor at the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, and his key areas of research are in applied macroeconomics, trade & development and industrial economics. less Visit website Dr. Milind Gandhe Chief Programme Officer,
                           
                           
                                Machine Intelligence and Robotics (MINRO) COE,
                           
                           
                            IIIT Bangalore Milind is the Chief Program Officer at the Center of Excellence for Machine Intelligence and Robotics, IIIT Bangalore. Prior to joining IIITB, Milind has 26 years of experience in the corporate sector, first with Sasken Communication Technologies and most recently with Tata Elxsi as the head of the Systems Business Unit. Milind has lead projects in Semiconductor, Automotive, Communications and Smart Home verticals. ... more Milind has a PhD in Computer Science and Engineering from IIT Bombay. Before his PhD, Milind obtained a B.Tech and an M. Tech also from IIT Bombay. His thesis was on Abstract Interpretation of Functional Programming Languages. Milind also has a Diploma in Practicing Management from INSEAD, France. Milind’s primary research interests are AI (Natural Language Processing, Mathematical Logic, Hardware acceleration for AI at the Edge) and Interaction between Society and Technology. less View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
BSMS2001P Business Data Management - Project BDM Capstone Project is an independent research project where the student is expected to reach out to a business firm (either from organized sectors viz., well established businesses in manufacturing, IT, automobile sectors etc. which has excellent systems in place to handle and manage data or from an unorganized sectors like Kirana stores, vegetable vendors etc. which do not maintain proper records), identify the issues or the problem(s) they face, collect primary data pertaining to it, clean the data, analyze it, and provide novel/ valuable insights to the decision maker(s). by G Venkatesh , Suresh Babu , Dr. Milind Gandhe Course ID: BSMS2001P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Recommended Co-requisites: BSMS2001 -  Business Data Management Project Course Overview In the proposal stage, the student is expected to provide information about the organization and its background, problem definition/ statement, the background of the problem, the problem-solving approach they wish to use with justification, the expected timelines for project completion and the probable outcomes of the project. In the midterm submission, students must provide a short video interaction clip with the business owner/ manager, tangible evidence like pictures, field notes etc., provide information on the meta data and descriptive statistics, conduct preliminary analysis, provide an interpretation of the results and findings. The final report submission is a complete report and involves in-depth explanation of the entire process from start to finish. The viva voce is conducted following acceptance of the final submission and for this, the student needs to make a presentation not exceeding 10 slides. What you’ll learn How to reach out and collect primary data, identify the issues or the problem(s), clean the data. Explain and justify the reasoning behind using a particular approach, report them in a professional manner, by knitting one section to the next and how the novel insights benefits decision maker(s). Hands-on experience in dealing with real world
problems and providing solutions. Reference Documents / Books Details of the BDM Project Course, Timelines & Submission Requirements DOWNLOAD About the Instructors G Venkatesh Professor of Practice,
                           
                           
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Venkatesh is a Professor of Practice at IIT Madras, where he is involved with several projects in the field of education. He is also a Fellow and Director of Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd, a leading Indian R&D services provider, and a founder of Mylspot, an education technology startup that aims to bridge knowledge gaps of students through a mentored learning platform. ... more Dr Venkatesh is a graduate in electronics from IIT Madras, PhD in Computer Science from TIFR, Mumbai and was a faculty member of the Computer Science & Engineering Dept of IIT Bombay for 8 years where his research interests revolved around declarative languages and their application to the design of embedded systems. He moved to the industry when Sasken was being formed, where he led their technology activities for over two decades. He was a visiting/adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore for 10 years and a Chair Professor in the department of EE at IIT Madras for 3 years. Dr. Venkatesh was elected as a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineers in 2006 and the IETE in 2012. He won the Technomentor award of the Indian Electronics and Semiconductor Association in 2013 and the Vasvik award for industrial research in 2015. Dr. Venkatesh serves on a number of government, industry and investor committees and boards in the areas of microelectronics, telecommunications and education. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking , BSMS2001 -
                                    Business Data Management and BSMS2002 -
                                    Business Analytics Suresh Babu Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Suresh Babu has completed his M.S. in Development Economics and M.Phil. in Applied Economics before completing his Ph.D. from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. He currently is a professor at the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, and his key areas of research are in applied macroeconomics, trade & development and industrial economics. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSMS2001 -
                                    Business Data Management Dr. Milind Gandhe Chief Programme Officer,
                           
                           
                                Machine Intelligence and Robotics (MINRO) COE,
                           
                           
                            IIIT Bangalore Milind is the Chief Program Officer at the Center of Excellence for Machine Intelligence and Robotics, IIIT Bangalore. Prior to joining IIITB, Milind has 26 years of experience in the corporate sector, first with Sasken Communication Technologies and most recently with Tata Elxsi as the head of the Systems Business Unit. Milind has lead projects in Semiconductor, Automotive, Communications and Smart Home verticals. ... more Milind has a PhD in Computer Science and Engineering from IIT Bombay. Before his PhD, Milind obtained a B.Tech and an M. Tech also from IIT Bombay. His thesis was on Abstract Interpretation of Functional Programming Languages. Milind also has a Diploma in Practicing Management from INSEAD, France. Milind’s primary research interests are AI (Natural Language Processing, Mathematical Logic, Hardware acceleration for AI at the Edge) and Interaction between Society and Technology. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSMS2001 -
                                    Business Data Management View all courses 
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSMS2002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Diploma Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS2002 Business Analytics The problems faced by decision makers in today’s business environments are extremely complex. Hence, the task of making good decisions is not easy. The answer is in building quantitative models, and this course is designed to help you understand the fundamentals of this critical, foundational, business skill. The business application of statistical methods is the core focus of this course. In that sense, the course builds on the core course in the first year of the program. That basic course focused on the preliminaries of the area. This course highlights a business application and then demonstates an application of a statistical techique to solve that scenario and arrive at the best decisions and insights. by Rahul R Marathe Course ID: BSMS2002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites: BSMS2001 -  Business Data Management What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS At the end of the this course, the students will be able to apply various statistical techniques to solve various business problems. Extrapolate using various techniques and with statistical robustness. Build data-centric business models. Course structure & Assessments 8 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Data dashboarding Insights from data summary WEEK 2 Can summarizing the data provide insights? WEEK 3 Do people in different cities prefer different
brand? WEEK 4 Predicting the stock returns – Regression basics WEEK 5 How do you pay a professor? – Regression diagnostics - Path variables WEEK 6 Can I cure cancer? – Logistic Regression - Connection with classification problem WEEK 7 What is the impact of repeatedly watching the same ad? Repeated measures ANOVA WEEK 8 When the data has a time axis: Time series modeling + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: SF Robert E Stine and Dean Foster, Statistics for Business: Decision Making and Analysis, Pearson. NCT Paul Newbold, William L. Carlson and Betty Thorne, Statistics for Business and Economics, Sixth Edition, Pearson. ASW David R. Anderson, Dennis J. Sweeney and Thomas A. Williams, Statistics for Business and Economics, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning. Keller Gerald Keller, Managerial Statistics, 9 Edition, Cengage Learning. LR Richard Levin and David Rubin, Statistics for Management, Seventh Edition, Pearson. About the Instructors Rahul R Marathe Professor,
                           
                           
                                Department of Management Studies,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Visit website View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSSE2001.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Diploma Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Home Academics BSSE2001 System Commands by Prof. Gandham Phanikumar Course ID: BSSE2001 Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Programming Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 8 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to GNU/Linux OS.
Setting up and running Linux environment. 
The command line environment.
Knowing hardware of your machine 
Information - commands such as hwinfo, lshw, df, free etc.
Diagnostics - commands to fetch hardware information such as battery state, memory modules etc.,
Knowing the OS and software of your machine
Commands to get details about operating system, versions etc. 
Packages - installed / available
Input / output redirection. WEEK 2 Introduction to packages and repositories.
Using 'apt' commands to manage packages.         
File types and related commands.
Understanding file permissions and access modes.
Managing file permissions through symbolic and numeric mode.
Concept of environment variables. Important environment variables such as $HOME, $USER and $PATH WEEK 3 Managing shell variables.
Prompt strings.
Symbolic links and hard links, brief introduction to inode numbers.
Exploring the root file system and related commands.
Using shell shortcuts with commands. 
Slicing output.
Managing programs currently running on the machine.
Shell access to a local / remote machine. WEEK 4 Redirection to script, variable and for logging purpose.
Using pipes.
Introduction to regex; using regex patterns and egrep.
Using egrep to extract useful information from files.
find command and its uses - patterns to pick specific files in a folder, using exec 
Command line editors (nano, vi, emacs - syntax highlighting & prompting, configuring options)
Writing and running simple Bash scripts. WEEK 5 How are shell scripts interpreted?
Using variables in scripts.
Passing command line arguments to scripts, to create your own commands.
More shell programming.
Writing conditional statements using if /else / fi.                 
Introduction to loops.                 
Using functions        
Configuring startup / periodic / recurring tasks WEEK 6 Text processing using AWK language.         
Using awk to run statics on a data file.        
Using regex within awk.        
Awk as a programming language
Introduction to 'sed' – another text processing utility.
Line by line processing to replace a regex pattern with a string.        
Use of place holders for matching regex patterns for use in replacing strings. WEEK 7 Introduction to make utility; concept of target and dependency; actions performed by make; conditional compilation; passing shell variables to make;
File packaging utilities such as compress, tar, zip, gzip, bzip2, xz.
Networking concepts
Introduction to IP addresses.
Concept of localhost. Intranet and public addresses.
Concept of ports and services that run on these ports.        
Concept of DNS and Domain names.
Network diagnostics using tools and commands.
Scripting a tool for analysis of logs. WEEK 8 Introduction to RAID for handling hardware failure.
Introduction to version control
Git as a version control system:
Overview of Git workflow 
Branches, repositories, forks, etc.
Creating and merging pull requests.
Personal access tokens.
Managing changes as local and remote.
Working demo of a public repository using Git
Approval workflow 
How a team collaborates on the private repository in an organization.
Managing pull requests for the owner, raising issues and resolving them. + Show all weeks About the Instructors Prof. Gandham Phanikumar Professor,
                           
                           
                                Metallurgical and Materials Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prof. Gandham Phanikumar's doctoral work is on heat transfer, fluid flow and solute transfer during laser processing of dissimilar metals. After joining IIT Madras in 2005, he has been teaching a UG core course on transport phenomena for several years. His research continues to involve concepts of transport phenomena in materials processing. less Visit website View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\diploma\course_pages\BSSE2002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Diploma Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Important Dates Academics Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Diploma in Programming Diploma in Data Science Admissions Eligibility Mandatory Requirements Application Process Qualifier Exam Qualifying Criteria International Students About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise SIGN IN Application for the next batch of the Diploma Program is now open. APPLY NOW Applications open now for next batch of the Diploma Program APPLY NOW Home Academics BSSE2002 Tools in Data Science This course will teach students to use popular tools for sourcing data, transforming it, building and optimizing models, communicating these as visual stories, and deploying them in production. by S Anand Course ID: BSSE2002 Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Data Science Recommended Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Recommended Co-requisites: BSCS2004 -  Machine Learning Foundations Course structure & Assessments 8 modules over 12 weeks of coursework, online assignments for each module, 1 remote online exam, 2 take home projects, 1 in-person end term exam.
                 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. MODULE 1 Discover the data MODULE 2 Get the data MODULE 3 Prepare the data MODULE 4 Model the data MODULE 5 Modern tools to simplify deep learning models MODULE 6 Design your output MODULE 7 Narrate a story MODULE 8 Deploy the results + Show all weeks About the Instructors S Anand Anand is a co-founder of Gramener, a data science company. He leads a team that tells visual stories from data. He is recognized as one of India’s top 10 scientists, and is a regular TEDx speaker. ... more Anand is a gold medallist from IIM Bangalore and an alumnus of IIT Madras, London Business School, IBM, Infosys Consulting, Lehman Brothers, and BCG. More importantly, he has hand-transcribed every Calvin & Hobbes strip ever, is addicted to Minecraft (thanks to his daughter), and dreams of watching every film on the IMDb Top 250 (except The Shining). less Visit website View all courses Contact Us Office of IITM Online Programs, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Privacy
                            Policy | Terms of
                            Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\aboutIITM.html
About IIT Madras English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BSc Degree Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calendar Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Houses & Societies PARADOX / Student Festivals School Connect Achievements Recognition 1. Toppers Page 2. Student's Best Projects 3. Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home About IITM About IIT Madras Indian Institute of Technology Madras is one of the foremost institutes of national importance for higher
        technical education and research. In 1956, the German Government offered technical assistance in establishing an institute of higher education in
        engineering in India. The first Indo-German agreement in Bonn, West Germany for the establishment of the Indian
        Institute of Technology at Madras was signed in 1959. The Institute was formally inaugurated in 1959 by Prof. Humayun Kabir, Union Minister for Scientific Research
        and Cultural Affairs. The IIT system has twenty three Institutes of Technology. The first of these to be
        instituted are at Kharagpur (estb. 1951), Mumbai (estb. 1958), Chennai (estb. 1959), Kanpur (estb. 1959), Delhi
        (estb. 1961), Guwahati (estb. 1994) and Roorkee (estb. 1847, joined IITs in 2001). The Institute has sixteen academic departments and several advanced research centres in various disciplines of
        engineering and pure sciences. A faculty of international repute, a brilliant student community, excellent
        technical & supporting staff and an effective administration have all contributed to the pre-eminent status of
        IIT Madras. The campus is located in the city of Chennai, previously known as Madras. Chennai is the state
        capital of Tamil Nadu, a southern state in India. IITM’s Experience in Online Education IITM is well-equipped to provide an online degree course. We have been ranked number 1 Engineering Institute for
        the past 5 years and we have been ranked number 1 Overall for the past 2 years by NIRF. Furthermore, IITM began the NPTEL program, the country’s first online content portal as an inter-IIT consortium
        project in 2001 and nptel.ac.in is one of the largest online course portals in
        the world. In 2014, IITM also created NPTEL online courses - the country’s first Massive Open Online Course
        (MOOC). Today, NPTEL is considered the largest MOOC provider in India. MHRD launched the SWAYAM MOOC platform in 2017 and NPTEL has been the largest contributor to it. NPTEL also
        manages the national MOOCs portal - swayam.gov.in as well as the network of more than 3800 SWAYAM local chapter colleges. With IITM continuing to lead the NPTEL
        project, it makes them the perfect choice to offer an online degree program. Why an Online Degree Initiative? IIT Madras wishes to reach out to the many aspiring and motivated learners across India. An online degree is the
        perfect way to accomplish this, as it is not limited by on-campus physical infrastructure. Being an online program, we can accommodate between 50,000 to a lakh learners per batch. It is a game changer as working professionals, and learners of any age group can enroll in it. Students currently enrolled in a physical college in any program can join here and earn their second degree . (University Grants Commission had
          announced in 2020 that students will now be permitted to pursue two degree programs simultaneously if one is
          in online mode) Since there are no restrictions on the base subjects, students from other streams such as commerce / arts / law and of course, science students can enroll in this program. Data Science and Machine Learning is proving to be
          useful in all disciplines and fields. All courses will be offered 3 times a year. Thus, learners have considerable flexibility in the pace they can select to move ahead in the program. The program gives flexibility to learners to set their goals . Learners who
          successfully complete all 8 courses in Foundational Level can get a certificate and exit. Alternatively, they
          can proceed to do the more specialised courses in the Diploma Level and exit with a Diploma in Programming
          AND/OR Diploma in Data Science from IIT Madras. However, those interested in acquiring the BS degree can
          proceed to take up the Degree Level courses. Check the Academics page for details. Based on their requirements, they can acquire certifications that will help them with better
          employment opportunities. The program will be rigorous in its delivery , just as any other
          program from IIT Madras. Learners have to spend time with the coursework every week and achieve minimum
          criteria to pass every course. Being an online program, the course content can be accessed by learners from anywhere . They
          need to have a laptop / desktop, a good internet connection, and more importantly, the will to learn and work
          hard. Learners will be required to travel to designated exam centres only for the quizzes and exams each term.
          View section about exam cities . Each course will have a discussion forum with an active academic team to help in clearing doubts. We plan to bring in more personalised mentors to help students with Diploma Level and
          Degree Level courses. In future, we are considering tie-ups with industries to enable internships and project opportunities . This will also facilitate hiring of our learners who perform well in the program. Relevant Links www.iitm.ac.in /ReachIITM /ReachIITM /iitmadras Faculty Co-ordinators BS Data Science and Applications Dr. Andrew Thangaraj Andrew Thangaraj, Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
          Madras, has been with the institute since June 2004. His bachelors was from IIT Madras and PhD from Georgia
          Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. His research interests are in the areas of information theory and
          error-control coding. He has served on the editorial boards of the IEEE Transactions on Communications and
          IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. From Nov 2011, he has been one of the Coordinators of the National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning
          ( NPTEL ), a multi-institutional
          project funded by the Ministry of Education and managed by IIT Madras. At NPTEL, he played a key role in the
          starting of online courses and certification on a massive scale through the SWAYAM portal . He is currently
          the Principal Investigator for SWAYAM. At IIT Madras, he led a team of faculty that started the Bachelor of Science Degree in Data Science &
          Applications ( IIT Madras Degree Program in Data Science and Applications ), launched in June 2020, with online course content delivery and in-person exams. He is currently a
          coordinator for the program. Dr. Vignesh Muthuvijayan Dr. Vignesh Muthuvijayan is a Professor in the Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of
          Biosciences, IIT Madras. He received his BTech in Chemical Engineering from A. C. Tech, Anna University,
          India. He went on to pursue his master's degree in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at the University of
          Maryland, Baltimore County, and his PhD in Chemical Engineering at Oklahoma State University. He also worked
          as a post-doc at Johns Hopkins University. He joined the Department of Biotechnology at IIT Madras in 2010.
          His research interests are in the area of biomaterials and their applications. Prof. Vignesh Muthuvijayan is
          also serving as a Coordinator for the IIT Madras BS in Data Science and Applications program and National
          Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL). Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics Overall Structure There are four levels in the IIT Madras Degree program and to get the BS Degree in Data Science and Applications from IIT
                Madras, a learner has to successfully complete all four levels. There is also the flexibility to exit at any level . Depending on the courses completed and credits earned, the
                learner can receive a Foundation Certificate from IITM CODE (Centre for Outreach and Digital Education) or Diploma(s) from IIT Madras or BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science from IIT Madras or BS Degree in Data Science and Applications from IIT Madras. Those who are interested in pursuing an exclusive Diploma Program in Programming or Data Science can also check out
                        our Diploma Program website . Courses and Credits in Each Level: Foundation Level: 32 credits | 8 courses Diploma Level: - Programming: 27 credits | 6 courses + 2 projects - Data Science: 27 credits | 6 courses + 2 projects BSc Degree Level: 28 credits BS Degree Level: 28 credits Total credits to be earned to get: BSc Degree: 114 credits BS Degree: 142 credits Completion time: 4 - 8 years The time period for this is based on learner’s preferred pace and performance in assessments . Expected learner engagement will be approximately 10hrs/course/week. Fees: Each term, pay only for courses you register for! Refer Fee Structure . Online Courses & Assignments Duration of each course: 12 weeks - Each week comprising 2-3 hrs of videos, practice questions, text
                                transcripts and online graded assignment(s). Quizzes and Exams In-person invigilated quizzes and exams as per the grading pattern defined for each course. Term Structure Every year is divided into three terms of four months each - January Term, May Term and September Term. Each term of four months has 12 weeks of coursework (video lectures and assignments), 2 in-person invigilated
                            Quizzes and End Term Exams. Depending on the course, assessments may include programming exams, mini projects,
                            vivas, take home assignments, etc. Course Registrations In each term, a learner may register for upto 4 courses depending on their CCC (Credit Clearing Capability). A learner’s CCC in the Foundation Level is calculated based on their performance in the Qualifier Exam or the
                        previous term’s End Term Exams. The CCC in the Diploma Level and thereafter is 4. All 8 courses in Foundation Level need to be successfully completed before registering for any Diploma Level course.
                        Similarly, all Diploma Level courses & projects need to be successfully completed before registering for any Degree
                        Level course. Assessments There are 3 types of assessments for each course: Weekly Assignments which are online monthly
                    in-person Quizzes in-person End Term Exam View More Details In addition, assessments may include programming exams, mini projects, vivas, take home assignments, etc. Assessment There are 3 types of assessments for each course - online weekly assignments, monthly in-person
                                    invigilated quizzes and an in-person invigilated end term exam. 1. Online Assignments A 12 week course will have one or more weekly assignments to be submitted online within the
                                                due date specified. The average score of the best 6 out of the first 9 weekly assignments given during the
                                                course run should be >= 40/100 to be eligible to write the final exam and get the hall
                                                ticket for the same. (Score in any unattempted assignment will be counted as 0). While the scores obtained in these will not be counted towards the Total Course Score T, it
                                                will determine the eligibility to write the End Term Exam. 2. Two Invigilated Quizzes Two quizzes will be conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8 based on the content of Weeks 1-4 and 1-8
                                    respectively. Each quiz will be a single session exam with 4 hrs to attempt 4 subjects, 3 hrs to attempt 3
                                                subjects and 2 hrs to attempt 2 or 1 subject. The score of a quiz not attempted will be taken as 0. No make-up quiz will be provided. It is mandatory to attend at least one of the 2 quizzes. Else, the learner will not be
                                                eligible to write the final exam. The Qualifier Exam Score will be counted as Quiz 1 score for the courses registered in the
                                                Foundation level only in the subsequent term of the Qualifier Exam. 3. End Term Exam At the end of a term, there will be an End Term Exam of 1.5 hours duration for each course.
                                                (This will ensure exams can be conducted only on Sundays and exams for 4 courses completed
                                                in 2 sessions of 3 hrs each throughout the program.) Eligibility to write the End Term Exam: Average weekly graded online assignment score >=
                                                40/100 AND learner has appeared for at least one out of the three invigilated quizzes. If the above eligibility is not satisfied, the learner will not be allowed to write the End
                                                Term Exam and will have to repeat the full course. The score obtained in the End Term Exam accounts for 50% of the Total Course Score T -
                                                called End Term Score (E). Pass criteria for each course Total Course Score (T) = Average Quiz Score Q (out of 50) + End Term Score E (out of 50) A candidate is deemed to have passed a course IF Total Course Score (T) >= 50/100. This
                                            criteria is the same for all learners in the course. Close Exam Cities The Invigilated Quizzes and End Term exams are conducted in a number of cities spread across India. The map shows our
                    current Exam Cities List. View List Students residing/physically present in India on exam day All students residing in India or physically present in India on the day of an in-centre exam must write exams at one of the exam centres in india. Learners based outside India We also conduct in-person exams in Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman and UAE. Learners based out of other countries will be allowed to take up remote proctored exams. On exam day, students writing such internet based exams will be asked to pin the location exam is being taken from. If any overseas students are planning to be in India on exam day, it is the student's responsibility to notify us ahead
                    of time so that we can arrange for you to write the exam(s) in one of the exam centres in india; hall tickets will also
                    be issued suitably. If any of these norms are violated, it will be considered as malpractice. Exam results may be
                    withheld pending investigation and findings of the exam committee. Note: Additional Exam Fee applies for all learners opting to write exams outside India. If you reside outside India and cannot find a centre in your city / country, please write to ge@study.iitm.ac.in for assistance. Exam Cities List Bahrain Manama Kuwait Salmiya Oman Muscat Singapore Singapore Sri Lanka Colombo Jaffna UAE Dubai Hamdan (AUH) Sharjah Andaman And Nicobar Islands Port Blair Andhra Pradesh Anantapur Bhimavaram Guntur Kadapa Kurnool Rajahmundry Tirupathi Vijayawada Vishakhapatnam Arunachal Pradesh Naharlagun Assam Dibrugarh Guwahati Silchar Tezpur Bihar Patna Bhagalpur Gaya Muzaffarpur Darbhanga Chhattisgarh Raipur Delhi Delhi Goa Panaji Gujarat Ahmedabad Anand Rajkot Surat Vadodara Haryana Faridabad Gurgaon Kurukshetra Himachal Pradesh Hamirpur Shimla Jammu and Kashmir Jammu Srinagar Jharkhand Dhanbad Jamshedpur Ranchi Karnataka Belgaum Bengaluru Dharwad Gulbarga Mangalore Mysore Kerala Calicut Ernakulam Kollam Kottayam Palakkad Thrissur Trivandrum Madhya Pradesh Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Maharashtra Amravati Aurangabad Jalgaon Kolhapur Mumbai Nagpur Nanded Nashik Pune Solapur Manipur Imphal Meghalaya Shillong Mizoram Aizawl Nagaland Dimapur Odisha Bhubaneswar Rourkela Sambalpur Puducherry Puducherry Punjab Chandigarh Jalandhar Ludhiana Amritsar Rajasthan Jaipur Jodhpur Kota Udaipur Sikkim Bardang Tamil Nadu Chennai-Avadi Chennai-South Coimbatore Erode Kanchipuram Madurai Salem Thanjavur Tiruchirappalli Tirunelveli Vellore Telangana Hyderabad Warangal Tripura Agartala Uttar Pradesh Agra Allahabad Ghaziabad Gorakhpur Greater Noida Kanpur Lucknow Meerut Varanasi Uttarakhand Dehradun Haldwani Roorkee West Bengal Aasansol Adisaptagram Durgapur Kolkata Siliguri Close Fee Structure For details about application fees, check Application Process in Admissions page. Each term, pay only for the courses you register for in that specific term. Goal Total Credits Total Fees INR Foundation Only 32 ₹32,000 Foundation + One Diploma 59 ₹94,500 Foundation + Two Diplomas 86 ₹1,57,000 BSc Degree 114 ₹2,21,000 - ₹2,27,000 BS Degree 142 ₹3,15,000 - ₹3,51,000 Fee waivers depend on category of learner and family income. Family Income > 5 LPA Family Income > 1 LPA and <= 5 LPA Family Income <= 1 LPA Fees Docs Required Fees Docs Required Fees Docs Required General Full Fee NIL 50% waiver EWS + Family Income 75% waiver EWS + Family Income OBC Full Fee NIL 50% waiver OBC-NCL + Family Income 75% waiver OBC-NCL + Family Income SC / ST 50% waiver SC / ST 50% waiver SC / ST 75% waiver SC / ST + Family Income PwD 50% waiver PwD 50% waiver PwD 75% waiver PwD + EWS / OBC-NCL + Family Income SC / ST + PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD *Fee waiver is not applicable for the International students. The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of the candidate, the income of
                his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her siblings and children below the age of 18 years. Family income certificate is not required while applying for the Degree program, but will be required to avail fee
                    weiver when joining the program. Download Family Income Certificate format OBC-NCL / EWS certificate, if applicable, need to be obtained in following format while applying: Download OBC-NCL Certificate format Download EWS Certificate format Note: If a learner does not pass a course in the term they registered for, they will need to repeat the entire
                    course in a later term with re-payment of full course fee. If a learner completed all course requirements, but couldn't
                    attend the end term exam alone, they can choose to repeat just the end term exam in the next term with the payment
                    of an end term exam fee (₹1000 for foundation level courses; ₹2000 for diploma / degree level courses). Foundation Level The Foundation Level comprises courses in Mathematics, Statistics, Basics of Programming and Python, and English. These courses have
        been chosen to ensure that the learner who passes these successfully is well prepared to proceed to the Diploma Level courses. Requirements for registration The learner should apply for and clear the Qualifier Process . Options on successful completion Learners have the following two options when they successfully complete all 8 Foundational Level courses: Exit: The learner may exit with a Foundational Certificate from Centre for Outreach
                    and Digital Education (CODE), IIT Madras. Proceed to next level : The learner can join the Diploma Level . 8 courses 32 credits 1 - 3 years 10 hrs/course/week ₹32,000* *Refer Fee Structure Course Name Credits Code Prerequisites Corequisites Mathematics for Data Science I 4 BSMA1001 None None Statistics for Data Science I 4 BSMA1002 None None Computational Thinking 4 BSCS1001 None None English I 4 BSHS1001 None None Mathematics for Data Science II 4 BSMA1003 BSMA1001 None Statistics for Data Science II 4 BSMA1004 BSMA1002, BSMA1001 BSMA1003 Programming in Python 4 BSCS1002 BSCS1001 None English II 4 BSHS1002 BSHS1001 None Diploma Level There are two sections in the Diploma Level with courses for Diploma in Programming and courses for Diploma in Data Science.
            Each of these diplomas comprises 5 core courses, 2 projects and 1 skill enhancement course. Requirements for registration The learner should have cleared all 8 Foundation Level courses. Options on successful completion Learners have the following options based on the courses completed in this level: If a learner has completed all the courses and projects in Foundation Level and both Diplomas, they can proceed to the BSc Degree Level . OR they may exit with a Diploma in Programming from IIT Madras. OR they may exit with a Diploma in Data Science from IIT Madras. OR they may exit with both Diplomas from IIT Madras. 12 courses + 4 projects 54 credits 1 - 3 years 15 hrs/course/week ₹1,25,000* *Refer Fee Structure Courses for Diploma in Programming The Diploma in Programming lays a sturdy foundation in databases and programming concepts with data structures and algorithms.
            The learner goes on to apply these in the building of a web application by the end of the diploma. 6 courses + 2 projects 27 credits 1 - 2 years 15 hrs/course/week ₹62,500* *Refer Fee Structure Course Name Credits Code Prerequisites Corequisites Database Management Systems 4 BSCS2001 None None Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python 4 BSCS2002 None None Modern Application Development I 4 BSCS2003 None BSCS2001 PROJECT Modern Application Development I -
                            Project 2 BSCS2003P None BSCS2003 Programming Concepts using Java 4 BSCS2005 None None Modern Application Development II 4 BSCS2006 BSCS2003 None PROJECT Modern Application Development II -
                            Project 2 BSCS2006P BSCS2003P BSCS2006 System Commands 3 BSSE2001 None None Courses for Diploma in Data Science The Diploma in Data Science exposes the learner to the holistic approach of gathering, analysing, and interpreting data for a
            variety of problems. The courses on Business Data lays down the context and the need for the data, while the Machine Learning
            courses equip the learner to use and analyse this data towards impactful conclusions. 6 courses + 2 projects 27 credits 1 - 2 years 15 hrs/course/week ₹62,500* *Refer Fee Structure Course Name Credits Code Prerequisites Corequisites Machine Learning Foundations 4 BSCS2004 None None Business Data Management 4 BSMS2001 None None PROJECT Business Data Management - Project 2 BSMS2001P None BSMS2001 Machine Learning Techniques 4 BSCS2007 None BSCS2004 Machine Learning Practice 4 BSCS2008 BSCS2004, BSCS2007 None PROJECT Machine Learning Practice - Project 2 BSCS2008P None BSCS2008 Business Analytics 4 BSMS2002 BSMS2001 None Tools in Data Science 3 BSSE2002 None BSCS2004 BSc Degree Level for BSc in Programming and Data Science Requirements for registration The learner should have cleared all 8 courses in Foundation Level and all 12 courses + 4
                projects in Diploma Level . Options on successful completion Once the learner successfully completes overall 114 credits including credits earned in all previous levels: they can proceed to the BS Degree Level . OR they may exit with a BSc Degree in Programming & Data Science from IIT Madras. BSc Degree Level 28 credits (Total 114 credits) 1 - 3 years 15 hrs/course/week ₹64,000 - ₹70,000* *Refer Fee Structure BS Degree Level for BS in Data Science and Applications Requirements for registration The learner should have earned 114 credits and completed the BSc Degree Level to enter the BS Degree
                Level. Exit Once the learner successfully completes 142 credits and the course requirements, they can exit with a BS Degree in Data
                    Science and Applications from IIT Madras. BS Degree Level 28 credits (Total 142 credits) 1 - 3 years 15 hrs/course/week ₹94,000 - ₹1,24,000* *Refer Fee Structure Degree Level Courses Core Courses There are two pairs of core courses in the degree level. It is mandatory for the learner to complete all four core courses. Core Courses Pair I Core Courses Pair II Software Testing AI: Search Methods for Problem Solving Software Engineering Deep Learning Elective Courses Here is the list of elective courses offered in the program. In the BSc and BS level, a maximum of 8 credits can be transferred from
        NPTEL and there is the option to do an apprenticeship and transfer up to a maximum of 12 credits in the BS level. (Note: List of elective courses may change each term depending on availability.) 1. Software Testing CORE COURSE 2. Software Engineering CORE COURSE 3. AI: Search Methods for Problem Solving CORE COURSE 4. Deep Learning CORE COURSE 5. Strategies for Professional Growth MANDATORY COURSE 6. Algorithmic Thinking in Bioinformatics 7. Big Data and Biological Networks 8. Data Visualization Design 9. Special topics in Machine Learning (Reinforcement Learning) 10. Speech Technology 11. Design Thinking for Data-Driven App Development 12. Industry 4.0 13. Sequential Decision Making 14. Market Research 15. Privacy & Security in Online Social Media 16. Introduction to Big Data 17. Financial Forensics 18. Linear Statistical Models 19. Advanced Algorithms 20. Statistical Computing 21. Computer Systems Design 22. Programming in C 23. Mathematical Thinking 24. Large Language Models 25. Introduction to Natural Language Processing (i-NLP) 26. Deep Learning for Computer Vision 27. Managerial Economics 28. Game Theory and Strategy 29. Foundations of Finance Sample Certificates BS in Data Science and Applications from IIT Madras BSc in Programming and Data Science from IIT Madras Diploma in Programming from IIT Madras Diploma in Data Science from IIT Madras Foundational Certificate from CODE, IIT Madras Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\academic_calendar.html
Academic Calendar English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BSc Degree Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calendar Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Houses & Societies PARADOX / Student Festivals School Connect Achievements Recognition 1. Toppers Page 2. Student's Best Projects 3. Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics Academic calendar Academic calendar Current academic calendar of the BS Degree Program. Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
             
 
Societies PARADOX / Student Festivals School Connect Achievements Recognition 1. Toppers Page 2. Student's Best Projects 3. Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements to Enroll and Learn Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop/desktop
              device will be a key requirement to learn effectively from our
              courses. For a complete list of software and hardware
              requirements, please refer to this document - Mandatory System Specifications . Learner should be able to travel to assigned exam centres for
              quizzes and exams, each term. Check the list of exam cities where our exam centres are currently located. Note: The details below are for the BS degree in Data Science and Applications from IIT Madras. We also offer a Diploma Only Program
              for those who are interested exclusively in pursuing a Diploma in
              Programming or Diploma in Data Science. Please visit the Diploma Program website for further details on this. Who can apply for admission? 1. Anyone who has passed Class 12 or equivalent can apply irrespective of age or academic background. Those who qualify can join the program immediately. View list of accepted class 12 equivalents. 2. School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams can apply irrespective of their group/stream/board. Those who qualify can join the program after passing Class 12. It is expected that the applicants have studied Mathematics and English in Class 10. No additional eligibility other than the ones mentioned above is required to apply for the qualifier process or join the foundational level courses after clearing the qualifying exam. Accepted Class 12 equivalents 1. A Diploma recognised by AICTE or a state board of
                    technical education of at least 3 year duration. 2. Any Public School / Board / University examination in
                    India or in any foreign country recognised as equivalent to
                    the 10+2 system by the Association of Indian Universities
                    (AIU). 3. Final examination of the two-year course of the Joint
                    Services Wing of the National Defence Academy. 4. General Certificate Education (GCE) examination (London /
                    Cambridge / Sri Lanka) at the Advanced (A) level. 5. High School Certificate Examination of the Cambridge
                    University or International Baccalaureate Diploma of the
                    International Baccalaureate Office, Geneva. 6. Higher Secondary Certificate vocational examination. 7. Intermediate or two-year Pre-University examination
                    conducted by a recognised Board / University. 8. Senior Secondary School Examination conducted by the
                    National Institute of Open Schooling with a minimum of five
                    subjects. Close Application Process Applications for the batch starting September 2024 is now open. Apply Now . Anyone who is eligible may start applying by filling in a simple application
              form
              
              and paying the application fee. General Category / OBC Applicant ₹3000 application fee SC / ST Category / PwD (>= 40% disablity ) Applicant ₹1500 application fee SC / ST Category Applicant who is ALSO PwD (>= 40% disablity
                    ) ₹750 application fee An additional exam facilitation fee will apply for learners opting to write the Qualifier Exam in an Exam Centre outside India. Application will be considered only when, after payment, applicant also fills in further details and submits required documents for verification. Applications without details & documents, even if paid, will not be considered valid. Admission to the Foundation Level Regular entry: All candidates, irrespective of their backgrounds, can earn admission to the Foundation Level by successfully completing the qualifier process. See details below JEE-based entry: Candidates eligible to appear for the most recent JEE Advanced are directly admitted to the Foundation Level. See details below Regular Entry All regular entry applicants must go through the Qualifier Process to earn admission to the Foundation Level. Qualifier Preparation: The qualifier process includes 4 weeks of coursework based on lecture videos, assignments, and live sessions of the four foundational level courses - English I, Mathematics for Data Science I, Statistics for Data Science I, and Computational Thinking - that will be provided through our online portal. Every week an assignment must be submitted for grading in each course. Qualifier Exam: At the end of the 4 weeks, a qualifier exam will be conducted for eligible candidates based on the content covered in the 4 weeks of study. Eligibility to appear for the qualifier exam (regular entry): In each course, the average of the best 2 out of the first 3 assignment
              scores will be calculated. Only those who get the minimum required
              average assignment scores in all four courses (as given below)
              will be allowed to appear for the Qualifier Exam. Minimum Average Assignment Score required in each course General Learner 40% SC / ST / PwD with 40% disability 30% PwD with 40% disability & SC / ST 30% OBC-NCL / EWS 35% Note: Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various
              categories of learners is applicable ONLY for the qualifier
              process. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass
              criteria once registered into the program. Qualifier Exam and Passing Criteria (regular entry): Only learners who are eligible to appear for the qualifier exam will receive the
              hall ticket for it. The in-person Qualifier Exam at the end of 4 weeks of coursework is of 4 hours duration and covers all 4 courses. To pass the Qualifier Exam , the learner has to get a minimum Average Qualifier Exam Score and a minimum Qualifier Exam Score in each course individually .
              Refer table: Min. Req. Qualifier Exam Score in each course Min. Req. Average Qualifier Exam Score General Learner 40% 50% SC / ST / PwD with 40% disability 30% 40% PwD with 40% disability & SC / ST 30% 40% OBC-NCL / EWS 35% 45% Note: Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various
              categories of learners is applicable ONLY for the qualifier
              process. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass
              criteria once registered into the program. Only those who pass the Qualifier Exam will be eligible to register for the Foundation Level courses. Validity of the Qualifier Exam result: For candidates who have already appeared for or cleared class 12 board exams , the Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 3 terms (or 1 year). So, a learner may choose to not join the program immediately after clearing the Qualifier Exam and join in the second or third term following the Qualifier Exam. For candidates who are yet to appear for class 12 board exams , the Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 6 terms (or 2 years). The extended validity is given to these candidates to facilitate joining the program after passing class 12. Though everyone who passes the Qualifier Exam will be allowed to
              register for Foundation Level, there will be limitations on the
              number of courses a learner will be allowed to register for in their
              first term based on the Average Qualifier Exam Score (M). Average Qualifier Exam Score (M) Number of courses allowed to register for Minimum required <= M < 50% up to 2 courses 50% <= M < 70% up to 3 courses M >= 70% up to 4 courses Re-attempt Qualifier Exam (regular entry) Learners who were eligible to appear for the qualifier exam, but did not clear the qualifier exam or were absent for it , will be eligible to re-attempt the qualifier exam in the same term (refer important dates ) without having to repeat the assignments. Anyone who is eligible may apply by filling in the re-attempt application form  that opens up immediately after the qualifier results are announced and paying the re-attempt fee. General Category / OBC Applicant ₹1500 re-attempt fee SC / ST Category / PwD (>= 40% disablity ) Applicant ₹750 re-attempt fee SC / ST Category Applicant who is ALSO PwD (>= 40% disablity
                    ) ₹375 re-attempt fee Learners who are not eligible to re-attempt OR do not clear the re-attempt exam may try again by applying again for the next term. Such learners will be required to pay the full application fee (₹3000 for general category applicants) and go through the entire qualifier process including the weekly assignments and qualifier exam. JEE-based Entry Candidates qualified to appear for current year's JEE Advanced can directly join our program by following the steps below: Complete the application form found here .  Pay the admission fee of Rs 3000/- Once we verify your proof for JEE advanced, you are eligible to directly start the foundation level courses. Next, you have to register for courses (English 1, Maths 1, Statistics 1, Computational Thinking) by paying the course fees. You can register to 1/2/3/4 courses depending on the time you would have to study. We will inform you of when you can register for courses. Only after you register for courses, will you get access to content. Thereafter you continue the program as a regular student. You can pursue this even as you join another college or degree. International Students Are you a learner outside India interested to join this program? Are you worried about the in-person assessments? This program is open to learners from all around the globe. You
              can study from IIT Madras and earn the BS in Data Science and Applications irrespective of the country you are from. IIT Madras is setting up modalities to conduct in-person exams in
              as many countries as possible. Currently, we conduct in-person
              exams in the following cities outside India: UAE - Dubai, Sharjah, Abu Dhabi Sri Lanka -
                Colombo, Jaffna Bahrain - Manama Kuwait - Salmiya Oman - Muscat Students residing in these countries must write exams in the
              designated exam centres. Students have to appear for in-person
              exams roughly once a month. Learners residing in any other country, apart from those shown
              above, can also enroll for this program and appear for remote
              proctored exams. Please write to the following email id with any
              queries you might have - ge@study.iitm.ac.in. Our team will
              get in touch with you and guide you on the next steps. Outside India learners who have taken exams with us till date:
                159 View detailed location of learners outside India Outside India learners who have taken exam with us till date Country Number of learners Mode of Exam BAHRAIN 2 Remote proctored CANADA 3 Remote proctored KENYA 1 Remote proctored KUWAIT 3 Remote proctored OMAN 4 Remote proctored QUATAR 8 Remote proctored SAUDI ARABIA 2 Remote proctored SINGAPORE 5 Remote proctored UNITED ARAB EMIRATES 127 "In centre: Dubai, Sharjah, Hamdan Others are remote
                        proctored" UNITED KINGDOM 1 Remote protected UNITED STATES 3 Remote protected Okay Required Documents to apply 1. Passport size photograph (JPEG / JPG format) 50KB-150KB 2. Signature (JPEG / JPEG format) 4KB-150KB 3. Photo ID Card Scan - Aadhar Card / PAN Card / Passport /
                  Voter ID / Driving License /
                  other Government ID with photo (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 4. Category Certificate - only for applicants who select SC /
                  ST / OBC-NCL* / EWS (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 5. PwD Certificate - only for applicants with 40% or more
                  disability (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 6. Proof of applicant having been permanently disabled OR
                  parent having been permanently disable / killed during war or
                  peacetime operations while serving as a defence / paramilitary
                  personnel. - if applicable (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 7. Only for those applying to join via JEE-based entry: Scoresheet / admit card / registration receipt as proof of eligibility to write JEE Advanced (PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. *Note that BC / OBC certificate is not the same as OBC-NCL
                  (Other Backward Caste - Non Creamy Layer) certificate. Only
                  applicants belonging to OBC caste as listed in Central
                  Government’s www.ncbc.nic.in website and also belonging to Non
                  Creamy Layer may apply in the “OBC-NCL” category. Other BC /
                  OBC applicants must apply in the “General” category. Download OBC-NCL Certificate format Download EWS Certificate format Okay Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
 

Foundational Level Does IIT Madras offer B.Sc in Programming & Data Science on-campus? Does IIT Madras offer B.Sc in Programming & Data Science on-campus? No, there is no equivalent on-campus version. IIT Madras has carefully curated this exclusively as an online program. Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities? Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities? Due to limitations of campus facilities and students being spread out geographically, learners enrolled in the program will not have access to IITM campus facilities. What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional languages? What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional languages? All our program courses are taught in English. Hence, we expect a minimum proficiency in English language to participate in the program. I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? It is not necessary to have a prior knowledge of coding to learn from our program. Our program is structured in such a way that once a learner starts from the Foundational level and progresses towards the Degree level, in sequence, he / she will obtain sufficient proficiency in Programming and Data Science. How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? The full program can take anywhere between 3 and 6 years to complete. On an average, we anticipate that a learner studying part time will finish the degree in 4 to 5 years. While this is the estimated time for the full degree, a diploma can potentially be obtained faster (around 8 months - 2 years). Check Academics page to better understand the program structure. What are the technological requirements for this program? What are the technological requirements for this program? Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop / desktop device will be a key requirement to learn effectively from our courses. Familiarity with Google tools would be an advantage. Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction? Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction? No. Pre-recorded lessons and assignments will be made available on our portal on a weekly basis. Learners can learn from the content released each week at their own pace, but will be required to submit the weekly assignments online within stipulated deadlines. One or two LIVE sessions per course may be conducted to clear doubts and interact with the course instructor and course support team. What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? The program is split into three levels that have to be done strictly in sequence: 1: Foundational Level (8 courses) 2: Diploma Level (6 Programming courses + 6 Data Science courses) 3: Degree Level (11 courses) Check Overall Structure in Academics page. How much time do I need to spend on a course per day? How much time do I need to spend on a course per day? The expected effort to do well in one course is about 10 hours per week. How many courses can I complete in a year? How many courses can I complete in a year? There are 3 terms in a year. Learner may be allowed to register for a maximum of 2 - 4 courses in a term depending on their performance in previous exams and their preferred pace of learning. Note that all courses of one level need to be completed before registering for courses in the next level, and all prerequisites of a course need to be completed before registering for that course. How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? Each course page will have a discussion forum where learners can raise their course-related questions and interact with the course instructor or course support team. For all questions not related to the course, you may write to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM Online Degree Program? Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM Online Degree Program? We have NOT created any official groups anywhere yet. We currently answer all questions / doubts via support email / calls. We have plans to create official groups for our learners when the qualifier month starts. We will reach out to you through whatsapp, email and SMS. Kindly look out for communication from our side on this. Are there any sample video content or assignments? Are there any sample video content or assignments? As a sample, Week 1 content videos have been made available for the first four Foundational Level courses for you to try and learn from. We recommend you to check out these lectures and try the sample assignment we have put out for each course. The links to Week 1 Content & Assignment pages can be accessed from the Foundational Level courses section in Academics page. I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? Please send us your registered email ID and a screenshot of the error / issue with relevant description to support@onlinedegeree.iitm.ac.in If the error is after payment has been made, please forward the confirmation email from Razorpay along with email ID, application number and screenshot with description. Is there an attendance policy for this program? Is there an attendance policy for this program? There is no daily attendance, but once you register for the courses, submission of weekly assignment is taken as an attendance indicator. Minimum required scores in weekly assignments of a course will determine if a learner will be allowed to write the end term exam for that course or not. Can I take my exams from home? Can I take my exams from home? No. Every term will have 3 quizzes and an end term exam for each course. All quizzes and end term exams will be in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across the country. You need to travel to the exam centre and take these exams. Check Exam Cities in Academics Page. What is a quiz? What is a quiz? A quiz is similar or equivalent to a monthly test in schools and colleges. Marks obtained in quizzes count towards the total score obtained in the course. All quizzes will be in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across the country. Are the exam dates flexible? Are the exam dates flexible? No, the exam dates are not flexible. The quiz and end term exam dates are fixed for all learners taking the same course in a term. We try our best to schedule all exams during the weekends though it may not be possible for every exam. What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? If the city of your choice is not in our current exam cities list, please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. We will consider your request, but there is no guarantee that we will add it. Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many? Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many? There may be more than one exam centre in any exam city. The count depends on the number of learners in each city and availability of centres on given date with our exam partner. When will the term start? What is the timeline? When will the term start? What is the timeline? Learners who clear the Qualifier Exam will be expected to register for the program right after their results are announced. In the first term alone, classes start (with week 5) immediately after the completion of week 4 in the qualifier phase with no gap. Please check Important Dates in Admissions page to get to know the timeline. Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Learners who join the IIT Madras Online Degree Program have the option of exiting the program earlier with a Diploma in Programming AND / OR Diploma in Data Science. Learners who wish to exclusively pursue a Diploma in Programming OR Data Science alone and already have a basic understanding of the foundations can check out IIT Madras Diploma Program website . What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? Check Eligibility section in Admissions page for the latest update of the eligibility criteria. Is the program available to students currently in class 12 or equivalent? Is the program available to students currently in class 12 or equivalent? Students currently in class 12 (or equivalent) will be allowed to apply for the program, go through the qualifier phase and write the qualifier exam, but will not be allowed to register for the foundational level of the program until they clear class 12 (or equivalent). Note that a Qualifier Exam result is valid only for 3 terms (about 1 year) right after the exam. So, plan accordingly. I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? Yes, you may apply for the Program if you have studied Mathematics & English in class 10 and have cleared class 12 or equivalent. I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? Yes. If you cleared class 12 or equivalent in 2019 or earlier, you may apply for our program - there is no requirement to have completed a degree program. Check our latest eligibility criteria . How and where can I apply for the program? How and where can I apply for the program? Anyone who is eligible may apply by filling in the application form, uploading required documents and paying the application fee. We recommend that you go through the Academics Page to better understand the program and the Admissions Page to understand the admission process before applying. What is the qualifier process? What is the qualifier process? All applicants will have to go through a Qualifier Process, like a trial month, wherein they will get access to 4 weeks of content for the four foundational level courses - English I, Mathematics for Data Science I, Statistics for Data Science I and Computational Thinking. Check Qualifier Process in Admissions page Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam? What is the passing criteria? Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam? What is the passing criteria? No. Only the learners who get the minimum required marks in the online assignments during the qualifier process of 4 weeks will allowed to attend the qualifier exam. Only those learners allowed to write the qualifier exam shall be provided with hall tickets. Refer to Qualifier Process and the section below it to learn about the minimum required marks in the qualifier assignments and minimum required marks to pass / clear the qualifier exam. How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later term if I clear the qualifier exam now? How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later term if I clear the qualifier exam now? The Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 3 terms (or 1 year). So, a learner may choose to not register for Foundational Level immediately after clearing the Qualifier Exam and register for the Foundational level in the second or third term following the Qualifier Exam. How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? For now, we are running applications / admissions thrice a year. What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? The list of required documents is available on the Application Process section of the admissions page. Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or university (like on the NPTEL platform)? Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or university (like on the NPTEL platform)? IITM's Online BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science is a stand alone program. Credits cannot be transferred. Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier (like IGNOU)? Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier (like IGNOU)? No, the course content will be provided only in online mode so you can watch them anytime, anywhere. There will be no hard copy provided. Depending on the course, learners may be recommended reference books / material that they may buy separately. Can I submit an older version of the OBC-NCL / EWS certificate while applying or registering for courses? Can I submit an older version of the OBC-NCL / EWS certificate while applying or registering for courses? Student has to submit valid certificates while applying / registering. These will be verified by our team. An approved certificate will be valid for three terms. After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? No. There will be no refund of application fee once paid. After registering for a course in a term, can I carry over the fees to the next term if I am not able to complete the course? After registering for a course in a term, can I carry over the fees to the next term if I am not able to complete the course? No. A course registration is valid only for one term. If a learner is not able to clear a course in a term, they will be considered as having failed the course and will need to register for the course again at a later term along with the required fee. Note that a learner will be allowed to drop off from a course within the first four weeks of the term. In such cases, a part of the course fee will be retained as admin charges and the balance, if any, may be carried over to the next term. What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? The overall program fees will not be paid at one stretch. The actual fees you will be paying in each term will be in proportion to the number of courses you register for in the respective term. So, if you register for 2 courses in a term, you have to pay the fees only for those 2 courses. For more details, please refer to Fee Structure in Academics Page. What is the mode of payment? What is the mode of payment? Fees can be paid only through online mode. Fees through DD will not be accepted. Note that payment cannot be made using Debit Card. You can pay using any Credit Card, Netbanking (all Indian Banks), Wallet, UPI (Google Pay, BHIM, etc.). Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Yes. After successful completion of payment, you will receive a confirmation email from Razorpay. If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? In case of failed payments, it will take 3 to 4 weeks for the money to be credited back in your bank account. Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Your application form will be considered as submitted only upon making the application fee payment. Until then, you may edit the contents of your application form. After the application fee has been paid, you will not be allowed to edit the application form. In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my application to be verified? My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my application to be verified? Verification of documents may take upto 3 weeks. Please be patient. We will keep you updated about your application status by email / SMS. How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? After you submit your application, we verify the same before changing the status of uploaded document(s) to "accepted" or "returned / rejected". Be careful when filling the application form and double check the information you enter. We verify the files / documents you have uploaded (photograph, signature, ID card, SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD document if applicable). If any of the files / documents uploaded is unclear or broken or found to be wrong or incorrect, your application may be "returned / rejected". In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verfication, you will be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. Being honest and careful while filling the application form and uploading correct documents in the correct formats will help get your application "accepted". Check Application Process for required documents, document formats and sizes. Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? No. You will need to pick two different preferences for exam cities in the order of your preference. Your exam centre shall be allotted in any one of the two exam cities picked depending on availability. We recommend that you familiarise with the current available Exam City options to be able to pick your preferred exam cities. Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? You will not be allowed to change your exam city for the qualifier exam after submitting your preferences in the application form. If there is any unavoidable situation because of which you need to have the qualifier exam city changed, please write to us. We will try to accommodate your request based on availability, but cannot guarantee a change of exam city. Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? No. The Exam city preferences selected in the application form is for the Qualifier Exam only. You will have the option of picking a different set of Exam City options, if you wish, after qualifying for the later invigilated exams. Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? We are trying to see if this is possible. Please watch out for announcements regarding scholarships / loans. Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS /PwD candidates will have concession in minimum scores required during the qualifier process to enter the program. Check out Qualifier Process in Admissions page. Note that there will be no such concessions after entering the program. (OBC candidates not belonging to the OBC-NCL category cannot avail any concession) Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower family income? Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower family income? Only SC / ST / PwD candidates may avail fee waivers in the application stage. After clearing the qualifier process and exam, candidates belonging to any category (General / OBC / EWS / SC / ST / PwD) may avail fee waivers in course fees based on family income. Check Fee Structure in Academics page for details. What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of the candidate, the income of his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her siblings and children below the age of 18 years. After clearing the Qualifier Exam, all learners who wish to avail fee waivers based on Family Income required to submit Family Income Certificate in the format provided in the Fee Structure section. Note that the Family Income Certificates are valid only for one year and will need to be submitted afresh each year to continue availing fee waiver based on Family Income through the program. I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income in below 5 lakhs per annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income in below 5 lakhs per annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? Economically Weaker Section (EWS) in India, as defined by the Govt. of India, is a sub-category of people belonging to the General category with an annual family income less than ₹8 lakhs per annum and who do not belong to any category such as SC/ST/OBC. Course fee waivers from IIT Madras are available for general category learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum. As per the policy of IIT Madras, and as part of our documentation process to ensure that we give fee waiver benefits to the deserving learners, we require general category learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum to submit both EWS certificate and Family Income certificate. EWS and Family Income certificates will need to be obtained in the format mentioned in the Fee Structure section in Academics page. Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT Madras? Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT Madras? We will try to make internship / recruitment opportunities available to learners; we will notify learners when the opportunities arise. How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? A large number of learners apply and participate in the qualifier process. After clearing the qualifier process, learners will need to clear foundational level courses, diploma level courses and then the degree level courses to finally get a BSc degree from IIT Madras. That's a total of 31 courses of IIT standard and 116 course credits. When a student is able to successfully clear these courses and fulfill all the academic requirements, we are confident that the students will be employable. Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BSc Degree? Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BSc Degree? The demand for data analysts / scientists and full stack developers is very high. Through our program, we do our best to equip our learners with required subject expertise. We are also planning to give soft skills training as part of the program. It is all about enabling IITM BSc graduates with the right job opportunities. IIT Madras will actively reach out to the recruiters in the context of placement opportunities for the graduates of the Online BSc Degree Program. What is the registration process for the Foundational Level? What is the registration process for the Foundational Level? Once you clear the Qualifier Exam, you will be allowed to access the Course Registration Form from your dashboard upon logging in. In the Course Registration Form, you will need to fill the required details, upload necessary documents and pay the course fee to register for the first term of your Foundational Level. You may choose to register for one or more Foundational Level courses with the upper limit of courses you can register for depending on your Qualifier Exam Score. Note that there will be an added Exam Fee applicable for learners opting to write their quizzes and end term exams outside India. What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the Foundational Level? What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the Foundational Level? It is mandatory any one of these documents while registering for Foundational Level: - 12th or equivalent mark sheet OR - Degree Certificate OR - Certificate of the highest level of education What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later? What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later? Please refer to the Fee Structure section in the Academics page to see which fee waiver may be applicable to you and the relevant documents / certificates that will need to be submitted. I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I need to submit them again while registering for the Foundational Level? I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I need to submit them again while registering for the Foundational Level? No, not required to submit again. However, the EWS / OBC-NCL certificate need to be submitted again if the previously submitted certificate is not valid until the end of the current financial year. I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any fee waiver category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any fee waiver category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? Please be informed that you will not be paying the entire Program fee or Foundational Level fee at one stretch. The actual fees you will be paying will be in proportion to the number of courses you register for in every term. So, if you register for 2 courses in the January 2021 Term, you have to pay the course fees only for those 2 courses. In the Fee Structure section, select your goal to be able to see a detailed PDF with break down of course fee over each term. Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? The personal email ID you applied for the program with cannot be changed. This email ID is used to access the whole Qualifier Process and the Foundational Level Course Registration Form. Once all the documents uploaded in the Foundational Level Course Registration Form are approved, each registered learner will be assigned a roll number and a corresponding official IIT Madras Online Degree student email ID. After that, all further communication and course access will be through the official student email ID. Is it possible to get an educational loan for this Program? Is it possible to get an educational loan for this Program? We are working on the process of getting the bank loans approved for this Program. Please do look out for updates from our side on this. Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? No, the current portal will be used for all the Levels. You will be given a new official IITM Online Degree student email ID to access the portal. Will I be issued an ID card? Will I be issued an ID card? An ID card in electronic format will be provided, subject to conditions on use of ID card. Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level? Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level? The BSc Degree has to be completed within a maximum period of 6 years. While a 1 or 2 year break between Levels is allowed, we recommend that you time the length of your breaks depending on whether you want to pursue a Diploma or Degree, and how many courses you are able to take up in a term. I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier Exam. What will be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier Exam. What will be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? You can re-apply again for the immediate next Qualifier Process with partial application fee payment. Your previous assignment scores will be considered and you will be directly eligible to write the Qualifier Exam without having to submit assignments again. I applied for the Qualifer Exam but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment scores to take Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What will be the procedure to re-apply? I applied for the Qualifer Exam but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment scores to take Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What will be the procedure to re-apply? You have to re-apply as a new applicant with payment of full application fee. I'm eligible to apply 4 courses in the upcoming term, but I have only 2 Foundational Level courses left to complete. Will I be allowed to register for Diploma Level courses along with the Foundational Level courses? I'm eligible to apply 4 courses in the upcoming term, but I have only 2 Foundational Level courses left to complete. Will I be allowed to register for Diploma Level courses along with the Foundational Level courses? No, you have to complete all the 8 courses in Foundation Level before enrolling to the Diploma Level courses. What is the eligiblity to write the End Term Exam for a course? What is the eligiblity to write the End Term Exam for a course? To be eligible to write the End Term Exam for a course, it is mandatory for the learner to have (i) obtained in the course an Average Assignment Score >= 40/100 AND (ii) appeared for at least one out of the three proctored in-person Quizzes. Learners who are not eligible to write a specific course's End Term Exam will not be issued hall ticket for the same. They will have to repeat the entire course including assignments and quizzes in a later term. Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes? Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes? It is mandatory to attempt at least one of the three proctored in-person quizzes in a term to be eligible to appear for the End Term Exams. Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End Term? Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End Term? For the courses you register for immediately after clearing your Qualifier Exam, yes, your Qualifier phase assignment scores will be included while calculating eligibility for the End Term Exam. For courses that you register for in a later term, you will be required to repeat the assignments completed in the Qualifier phase. Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent term? Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent term? The Qualifier Exam Score will be counted as Quiz 1 Score for the courses registered in the Foundation level in the term immediately after the Qualifier exam. What will happen if I am absent for an End Term Exam? What will happen if I am absent for an End Term Exam? Learner has two options: 1. Register for the course in the subsequent term with the option of taking the End Term Exam alone and by paying a reduced fee (Rs.1000 per Foundational Level course and Rs.2000 per Diploma / Degree Level Course). 2. Repeat the entire course (including assignments and quizzes) by paying the full course fee. What is the procedure to add / drop a course? What is the procedure to add / drop a course? Once the registration window closes in any term, adding courses will not be allowed. Dropping a course will be allowed within 4 weeks of the term start. Can I get a refund if I drop a course within the first four weeks of the term start? Can I get a refund if I drop a course within the first four weeks of the term start? For courses dropped within the first four weeks of the term, admin charges will be retained and the balance course fee, if any, will be refunded. Admin charges for a Foundational Level course is Rs.2000 and the admin charges for a Diploma  / Degree Level course is Rs.4000. For learners who registered to take exams outside India, 50% of End Term Exam Fee for the dropped course will be refunded. If such a learner chooses to drop all courses in a term, 50% of Quiz 2 & Quiz 3 fee will also be refunded. For more details, please refer to the operations document shared with registered students named "Part II - Foundation + Diploma" under section "13.7. Dropping a Course". Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades? Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades? Though it is not recommended, a learner may choose to repeat a course for improving grades any number of times. The course fee for repeating a course will be twice the regular course fee and the learner will have to submit the online graded weekly assignments, appear for the Quiz(zes) and End Term Exam. The highest score among all attempts of a course will be used for calculating the CGPA. What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? Please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in How can I change the exam city within India? How can I change the exam city within India? Each exam has a deadline before which change of exam city is allowed. Option to change the exam city will be available till each deadline in the student Dashboard, in the "Exam Cities and Hall Tickets" page. Does IIT Madras offer B.Sc in Programming & Data Science on-campus? Does IIT Madras offer B.Sc in Programming & Data Science on-campus? No, there is no equivalent on-campus version. IIT Madras has carefully curated this exclusively as an online program. Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities? Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities? Due to limitations of campus facilities and students being spread out geographically, learners enrolled in the program will not have access to IITM campus facilities. What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional languages? What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional languages? All our program courses are taught in English. Hence, we expect a minimum proficiency in English language to participate in the program. I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? It is not necessary to have a prior knowledge of coding to learn from our program. Our program is structured in such a way that once a learner starts from the Foundational level and progresses towards the Degree level, in sequence, he / she will obtain sufficient proficiency in Programming and Data Science. How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? The full program can take anywhere between 3 and 6 years to complete. On an average, we anticipate that a learner studying part time will finish the degree in 4 to 5 years. While this is the estimated time for the full degree, a diploma can potentially be obtained faster (around 8 months - 2 years). Check Academics page to better understand the program structure. What are the technological requirements for this program? What are the technological requirements for this program? Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop / desktop device will be a key requirement to learn effectively from our courses. Familiarity with Google tools would be an advantage. What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? The program is split into three levels that have to be done strictly in sequence: 1: Foundational Level (8 courses) 2: Diploma Level (6 Programming courses + 6 Data Science courses) 3: Degree Level (11 courses) Check Overall Structure in Academics page. How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? Each course page will have a discussion forum where learners can raise their course-related questions and interact with the course instructor or course support team. For all questions not related to the course, you may write to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM Online Degree Program? Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM Online Degree Program? We have NOT created any official groups anywhere yet. We currently answer all questions / doubts via support email / calls. We have plans to create official groups for our learners when the qualifier month starts. We will reach out to you through whatsapp, email and SMS. Kindly look out for communication from our side on this. Are there any sample video content or assignments? Are there any sample video content or assignments? As a sample, Week 1 content videos have been made available for the first four Foundational Level courses for you to try and learn from. We recommend you to check out these lectures and try the sample assignment we have put out for each course. The links to Week 1 Content & Assignment pages can be accessed from the Foundational Level courses section in Academics page. When will the term start? What is the timeline? When will the term start? What is the timeline? Learners who clear the Qualifier Exam will be expected to register for the program right after their results are announced. In the first term alone, classes start (with week 5) immediately after the completion of week 4 in the qualifier phase with no gap. Please check Important Dates in Admissions page to get to know the timeline. Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Learners who join the IIT Madras Online Degree Program have the option of exiting the program earlier with a Diploma in Programming AND / OR Diploma in Data Science. Learners who wish to exclusively pursue a Diploma in Programming OR Data Science alone and already have a basic understanding of the foundations can check out IIT Madras Diploma Program website . Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or university (like on the NPTEL platform)? Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or university (like on the NPTEL platform)? IITM's Online BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science is a stand alone program. Credits cannot be transferred. Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT Madras? Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT Madras? We will try to make internship / recruitment opportunities available to learners; we will notify learners when the opportunities arise. How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? A large number of learners apply and participate in the qualifier process. After clearing the qualifier process, learners will need to clear foundational level courses, diploma level courses and then the degree level courses to finally get a BSc degree from IIT Madras. That's a total of 31 courses of IIT standard and 116 course credits. When a student is able to successfully clear these courses and fulfill all the academic requirements, we are confident that the students will be employable. Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BSc Degree? Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BSc Degree? The demand for data analysts / scientists and full stack developers is very high. Through our program, we do our best to equip our learners with required subject expertise. We are also planning to give soft skills training as part of the program. It is all about enabling IITM BSc graduates with the right job opportunities. IIT Madras will actively reach out to the recruiters in the context of placement opportunities for the graduates of the Online BSc Degree Program. I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? It is not necessary to have a prior knowledge of coding to learn from our program. Our program is structured in such a way that once a learner starts from the Foundational level and progresses towards the Degree level, in sequence, he / she will obtain sufficient proficiency in Programming and Data Science. How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? Each course page will have a discussion forum where learners can raise their course-related questions and interact with the course instructor or course support team. For all questions not related to the course, you may write to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? Please send us your registered email ID and a screenshot of the error / issue with relevant description to support@onlinedegeree.iitm.ac.in If the error is after payment has been made, please forward the confirmation email from Razorpay along with email ID, application number and screenshot with description. What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? If the city of your choice is not in our current exam cities list, please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. We will consider your request, but there is no guarantee that we will add it. Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Learners who join the IIT Madras Online Degree Program have the option of exiting the program earlier with a Diploma in Programming AND / OR Diploma in Data Science. Learners who wish to exclusively pursue a Diploma in Programming OR Data Science alone and already have a basic understanding of the foundations can check out IIT Madras Diploma Program website . What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? Check Eligibility section in Admissions page for the latest update of the eligibility criteria. Is the program available to students currently in class 12 or equivalent? Is the program available to students currently in class 12 or equivalent? Students currently in class 12 (or equivalent) will be allowed to apply for the program, go through the qualifier phase and write the qualifier exam, but will not be allowed to register for the foundational level of the program until they clear class 12 (or equivalent). Note that a Qualifier Exam result is valid only for 3 terms (about 1 year) right after the exam. So, plan accordingly. I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? Yes, you may apply for the Program if you have studied Mathematics & English in class 10 and have cleared class 12 or equivalent. I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? Yes. If you cleared class 12 or equivalent in 2019 or earlier, you may apply for our program - there is no requirement to have completed a degree program. Check our latest eligibility criteria . How and where can I apply for the program? How and where can I apply for the program? Anyone who is eligible may apply by filling in the application form, uploading required documents and paying the application fee. We recommend that you go through the Academics Page to better understand the program and the Admissions Page to understand the admission process before applying. What is the qualifier process? What is the qualifier process? All applicants will have to go through a Qualifier Process, like a trial month, wherein they will get access to 4 weeks of content for the four foundational level courses - English I, Mathematics for Data Science I, Statistics for Data Science I and Computational Thinking. Check Qualifier Process in Admissions page Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam? What is the passing criteria? Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam? What is the passing criteria? No. Only the learners who get the minimum required marks in the online assignments during the qualifier process of 4 weeks will allowed to attend the qualifier exam. Only those learners allowed to write the qualifier exam shall be provided with hall tickets. Refer to Qualifier Process and the section below it to learn about the minimum required marks in the qualifier assignments and minimum required marks to pass / clear the qualifier exam. How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later term if I clear the qualifier exam now? How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later term if I clear the qualifier exam now? The Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 3 terms (or 1 year). So, a learner may choose to not register for Foundational Level immediately after clearing the Qualifier Exam and register for the Foundational level in the second or third term following the Qualifier Exam. How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? For now, we are running applications / admissions thrice a year. What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? The list of required documents is available on the Application Process section of the admissions page. Can I submit an older version of the OBC-NCL / EWS certificate while applying or registering for courses? Can I submit an older version of the OBC-NCL / EWS certificate while applying or registering for courses? Student has to submit valid certificates while applying / registering. These will be verified by our team. An approved certificate will be valid for three terms. After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? No. There will be no refund of application fee once paid. What is the mode of payment? What is the mode of payment? Fees can be paid only through online mode. Fees through DD will not be accepted. Note that payment cannot be made using Debit Card. You can pay using any Credit Card, Netbanking (all Indian Banks), Wallet, UPI (Google Pay, BHIM, etc.). Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Yes. After successful completion of payment, you will receive a confirmation email from Razorpay. If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? In case of failed payments, it will take 3 to 4 weeks for the money to be credited back in your bank account. Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Your application form will be considered as submitted only upon making the application fee payment. Until then, you may edit the contents of your application form. After the application fee has been paid, you will not be allowed to edit the application form. In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my application to be verified? My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my application to be verified? Verification of documents may take upto 3 weeks. Please be patient. We will keep you updated about your application status by email / SMS. How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? After you submit your application, we verify the same before changing the status of uploaded document(s) to "accepted" or "returned / rejected". Be careful when filling the application form and double check the information you enter. We verify the files / documents you have uploaded (photograph, signature, ID card, SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD document if applicable). If any of the files / documents uploaded is unclear or broken or found to be wrong or incorrect, your application may be "returned / rejected". In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verfication, you will be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. Being honest and careful while filling the application form and uploading correct documents in the correct formats will help get your application "accepted". Check Application Process for required documents, document formats and sizes. Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? No. You will need to pick two different preferences for exam cities in the order of your preference. Your exam centre shall be allotted in any one of the two exam cities picked depending on availability. We recommend that you familiarise with the current available Exam City options to be able to pick your preferred exam cities. Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? You will not be allowed to change your exam city for the qualifier exam after submitting your preferences in the application form. If there is any unavoidable situation because of which you need to have the qualifier exam city changed, please write to us. We will try to accommodate your request based on availability, but cannot guarantee a change of exam city. Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? No. The Exam city preferences selected in the application form is for the Qualifier Exam only. You will have the option of picking a different set of Exam City options, if you wish, after qualifying for the later invigilated exams. Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS /PwD candidates will have concession in minimum scores required during the qualifier process to enter the program. Check out Qualifier Process in Admissions page. Note that there will be no such concessions after entering the program. (OBC candidates not belonging to the OBC-NCL category cannot avail any concession) I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier Exam. What will be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier Exam. What will be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? You can re-apply again for the immediate next Qualifier Process with partial application fee payment. Your previous assignment scores will be considered and you will be directly eligible to write the Qualifier Exam without having to submit assignments again. I applied for the Qualifer Exam but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment scores to take Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What will be the procedure to re-apply? I applied for the Qualifer Exam but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment scores to take Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What will be the procedure to re-apply? You have to re-apply as a new applicant with payment of full application fee. What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? Please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in How can I change the exam city within India? How can I change the exam city within India? Each exam has a deadline before which change of exam city is allowed. Option to change the exam city will be available till each deadline in the student Dashboard, in the "Exam Cities and Hall Tickets" page. I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of coding before progressing to advanced levels? It is not necessary to have a prior knowledge of coding to learn from our program. Our program is structured in such a way that once a learner starts from the Foundational level and progresses towards the Degree level, in sequence, he / she will obtain sufficient proficiency in Programming and Data Science. I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? Please send us your registered email ID and a screenshot of the error / issue with relevant description to support@onlinedegeree.iitm.ac.in If the error is after payment has been made, please forward the confirmation email from Razorpay along with email ID, application number and screenshot with description. What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? If the city of your choice is not in our current exam cities list, please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. We will consider your request, but there is no guarantee that we will add it. What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? Check Eligibility section in Admissions page for the latest update of the eligibility criteria. Is the program available to students currently in class 12 or equivalent? Is the program available to students currently in class 12 or equivalent? Students currently in class 12 (or equivalent) will be allowed to apply for the program, go through the qualifier phase and write the qualifier exam, but will not be allowed to register for the foundational level of the program until they clear class 12 (or equivalent). Note that a Qualifier Exam result is valid only for 3 terms (about 1 year) right after the exam. So, plan accordingly. I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? Yes, you may apply for the Program if you have studied Mathematics & English in class 10 and have cleared class 12 or equivalent. I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? Yes. If you cleared class 12 or equivalent in 2019 or earlier, you may apply for our program - there is no requirement to have completed a degree program. Check our latest eligibility criteria . How and where can I apply for the program? How and where can I apply for the program? Anyone who is eligible may apply by filling in the application form, uploading required documents and paying the application fee. We recommend that you go through the Academics Page to better understand the program and the Admissions Page to understand the admission process before applying. What is the qualifier process? What is the qualifier process? All applicants will have to go through a Qualifier Process, like a trial month, wherein they will get access to 4 weeks of content for the four foundational level courses - English I, Mathematics for Data Science I, Statistics for Data Science I and Computational Thinking. Check Qualifier Process in Admissions page Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam? What is the passing criteria? Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam? What is the passing criteria? No. Only the learners who get the minimum required marks in the online assignments during the qualifier process of 4 weeks will allowed to attend the qualifier exam. Only those learners allowed to write the qualifier exam shall be provided with hall tickets. Refer to Qualifier Process and the section below it to learn about the minimum required marks in the qualifier assignments and minimum required marks to pass / clear the qualifier exam. How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later term if I clear the qualifier exam now? How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later term if I clear the qualifier exam now? The Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 3 terms (or 1 year). So, a learner may choose to not register for Foundational Level immediately after clearing the Qualifier Exam and register for the Foundational level in the second or third term following the Qualifier Exam. How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? For now, we are running applications / admissions thrice a year. What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? The list of required documents is available on the Application Process section of the admissions page. Can I submit an older version of the OBC-NCL / EWS certificate while applying or registering for courses? Can I submit an older version of the OBC-NCL / EWS certificate while applying or registering for courses? Student has to submit valid certificates while applying / registering. These will be verified by our team. An approved certificate will be valid for three terms. After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? No. There will be no refund of application fee once paid. What is the mode of payment? What is the mode of payment? Fees can be paid only through online mode. Fees through DD will not be accepted. Note that payment cannot be made using Debit Card. You can pay using any Credit Card, Netbanking (all Indian Banks), Wallet, UPI (Google Pay, BHIM, etc.). Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Yes. After successful completion of payment, you will receive a confirmation email from Razorpay. If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? In case of failed payments, it will take 3 to 4 weeks for the money to be credited back in your bank account. Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Your application form will be considered as submitted only upon making the application fee payment. Until then, you may edit the contents of your application form. After the application fee has been paid, you will not be allowed to edit the application form. In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my application to be verified? My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my application to be verified? Verification of documents may take upto 3 weeks. Please be patient. We will keep you updated about your application status by email / SMS. How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? After you submit your application, we verify the same before changing the status of uploaded document(s) to "accepted" or "returned / rejected". Be careful when filling the application form and double check the information you enter. We verify the files / documents you have uploaded (photograph, signature, ID card, SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD document if applicable). If any of the files / documents uploaded is unclear or broken or found to be wrong or incorrect, your application may be "returned / rejected". In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verfication, you will be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. Being honest and careful while filling the application form and uploading correct documents in the correct formats will help get your application "accepted". Check Application Process for required documents, document formats and sizes. Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? No. You will need to pick two different preferences for exam cities in the order of your preference. Your exam centre shall be allotted in any one of the two exam cities picked depending on availability. We recommend that you familiarise with the current available Exam City options to be able to pick your preferred exam cities. Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? You will not be allowed to change your exam city for the qualifier exam after submitting your preferences in the application form. If there is any unavoidable situation because of which you need to have the qualifier exam city changed, please write to us. We will try to accommodate your request based on availability, but cannot guarantee a change of exam city. Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? No. The Exam city preferences selected in the application form is for the Qualifier Exam only. You will have the option of picking a different set of Exam City options, if you wish, after qualifying for the later invigilated exams. Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS /PwD candidates will have concession in minimum scores required during the qualifier process to enter the program. Check out Qualifier Process in Admissions page. Note that there will be no such concessions after entering the program. (OBC candidates not belonging to the OBC-NCL category cannot avail any concession) How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? The full program can take anywhere between 3 and 6 years to complete. On an average, we anticipate that a learner studying part time will finish the degree in 4 to 5 years. While this is the estimated time for the full degree, a diploma can potentially be obtained faster (around 8 months - 2 years). Check Academics page to better understand the program structure. Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction? Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction? No. Pre-recorded lessons and assignments will be made available on our portal on a weekly basis. Learners can learn from the content released each week at their own pace, but will be required to submit the weekly assignments online within stipulated deadlines. One or two LIVE sessions per course may be conducted to clear doubts and interact with the course instructor and course support team. What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? The program is split into three levels that have to be done strictly in sequence: 1: Foundational Level (8 courses) 2: Diploma Level (6 Programming courses + 6 Data Science courses) 3: Degree Level (11 courses) Check Overall Structure in Academics page. How much time do I need to spend on a course per day? How much time do I need to spend on a course per day? The expected effort to do well in one course is about 10 hours per week. How many courses can I complete in a year? How many courses can I complete in a year? There are 3 terms in a year. Learner may be allowed to register for a maximum of 2 - 4 courses in a term depending on their performance in previous exams and their preferred pace of learning. Note that all courses of one level need to be completed before registering for courses in the next level, and all prerequisites of a course need to be completed before registering for that course. How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? Each course page will have a discussion forum where learners can raise their course-related questions and interact with the course instructor or course support team. For all questions not related to the course, you may write to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Are there any sample video content or assignments? Are there any sample video content or assignments? As a sample, Week 1 content videos have been made available for the first four Foundational Level courses for you to try and learn from. We recommend you to check out these lectures and try the sample assignment we have put out for each course. The links to Week 1 Content & Assignment pages can be accessed from the Foundational Level courses section in Academics page. Is there an attendance policy for this program? Is there an attendance policy for this program? There is no daily attendance, but once you register for the courses, submission of weekly assignment is taken as an attendance indicator. Minimum required scores in weekly assignments of a course will determine if a learner will be allowed to write the end term exam for that course or not. Can I take my exams from home? Can I take my exams from home? No. Every term will have 3 quizzes and an end term exam for each course. All quizzes and end term exams will be in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across the country. You need to travel to the exam centre and take these exams. Check Exam Cities in Academics Page. What is a quiz? What is a quiz? A quiz is similar or equivalent to a monthly test in schools and colleges. Marks obtained in quizzes count towards the total score obtained in the course. All quizzes will be in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across the country. Are the exam dates flexible? Are the exam dates flexible? No, the exam dates are not flexible. The quiz and end term exam dates are fixed for all learners taking the same course in a term. We try our best to schedule all exams during the weekends though it may not be possible for every exam. What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? If the city of your choice is not in our current exam cities list, please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. We will consider your request, but there is no guarantee that we will add it. Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many? Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many? There may be more than one exam centre in any exam city. The count depends on the number of learners in each city and availability of centres on given date with our exam partner. Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or university (like on the NPTEL platform)? Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or university (like on the NPTEL platform)? IITM's Online BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science is a stand alone program. Credits cannot be transferred. Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier (like IGNOU)? Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier (like IGNOU)? No, the course content will be provided only in online mode so you can watch them anytime, anywhere. There will be no hard copy provided. Depending on the course, learners may be recommended reference books / material that they may buy separately. After registering for a course in a term, can I carry over the fees to the next term if I am not able to complete the course? After registering for a course in a term, can I carry over the fees to the next term if I am not able to complete the course? No. A course registration is valid only for one term. If a learner is not able to clear a course in a term, they will be considered as having failed the course and will need to register for the course again at a later term along with the required fee. Note that a learner will be allowed to drop off from a course within the first four weeks of the term. In such cases, a part of the course fee will be retained as admin charges and the balance, if any, may be carried over to the next term. Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? No. You will need to pick two different preferences for exam cities in the order of your preference. Your exam centre shall be allotted in any one of the two exam cities picked depending on availability. We recommend that you familiarise with the current available Exam City options to be able to pick your preferred exam cities. Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my application? You will not be allowed to change your exam city for the qualifier exam after submitting your preferences in the application form. If there is any unavoidable situation because of which you need to have the qualifier exam city changed, please write to us. We will try to accommodate your request based on availability, but cannot guarantee a change of exam city. Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed for all the later exams? No. The Exam city preferences selected in the application form is for the Qualifier Exam only. You will have the option of picking a different set of Exam City options, if you wish, after qualifying for the later invigilated exams. After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if I fail the qualifier exam? No. There will be no refund of application fee once paid. After registering for a course in a term, can I carry over the fees to the next term if I am not able to complete the course? After registering for a course in a term, can I carry over the fees to the next term if I am not able to complete the course? No. A course registration is valid only for one term. If a learner is not able to clear a course in a term, they will be considered as having failed the course and will need to register for the course again at a later term along with the required fee. Note that a learner will be allowed to drop off from a course within the first four weeks of the term. In such cases, a part of the course fee will be retained as admin charges and the balance, if any, may be carried over to the next term. What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? The overall program fees will not be paid at one stretch. The actual fees you will be paying in each term will be in proportion to the number of courses you register for in the respective term. So, if you register for 2 courses in a term, you have to pay the fees only for those 2 courses. For more details, please refer to Fee Structure in Academics Page. What is the mode of payment? What is the mode of payment? Fees can be paid only through online mode. Fees through DD will not be accepted. Note that payment cannot be made using Debit Card. You can pay using any Credit Card, Netbanking (all Indian Banks), Wallet, UPI (Google Pay, BHIM, etc.). Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Yes. After successful completion of payment, you will receive a confirmation email from Razorpay. If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? In case of failed payments, it will take 3 to 4 weeks for the money to be credited back in your bank account. Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? We are trying to see if this is possible. Please watch out for announcements regarding scholarships / loans. Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower family income? Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower family income? Only SC / ST / PwD candidates may avail fee waivers in the application stage. After clearing the qualifier process and exam, candidates belonging to any category (General / OBC / EWS / SC / ST / PwD) may avail fee waivers in course fees based on family income. Check Fee Structure in Academics page for details. What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of the candidate, the income of his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her siblings and children below the age of 18 years. After clearing the Qualifier Exam, all learners who wish to avail fee waivers based on Family Income required to submit Family Income Certificate in the format provided in the Fee Structure section. Note that the Family Income Certificates are valid only for one year and will need to be submitted afresh each year to continue availing fee waiver based on Family Income through the program. I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income in below 5 lakhs per annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income in below 5 lakhs per annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? Economically Weaker Section (EWS) in India, as defined by the Govt. of India, is a sub-category of people belonging to the General category with an annual family income less than ₹8 lakhs per annum and who do not belong to any category such as SC/ST/OBC. Course fee waivers from IIT Madras are available for general category learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum. As per the policy of IIT Madras, and as part of our documentation process to ensure that we give fee waiver benefits to the deserving learners, we require general category learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum to submit both EWS certificate and Family Income certificate. EWS and Family Income certificates will need to be obtained in the format mentioned in the Fee Structure section in Academics page. What is the registration process for the Foundational Level? What is the registration process for the Foundational Level? Once you clear the Qualifier Exam, you will be allowed to access the Course Registration Form from your dashboard upon logging in. In the Course Registration Form, you will need to fill the required details, upload necessary documents and pay the course fee to register for the first term of your Foundational Level. You may choose to register for one or more Foundational Level courses with the upper limit of courses you can register for depending on your Qualifier Exam Score. Note that there will be an added Exam Fee applicable for learners opting to write their quizzes and end term exams outside India. What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the Foundational Level? What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the Foundational Level? It is mandatory any one of these documents while registering for Foundational Level: - 12th or equivalent mark sheet OR - Degree Certificate OR - Certificate of the highest level of education What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later? What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later? Please refer to the Fee Structure section in the Academics page to see which fee waiver may be applicable to you and the relevant documents / certificates that will need to be submitted. I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I need to submit them again while registering for the Foundational Level? I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I need to submit them again while registering for the Foundational Level? No, not required to submit again. However, the EWS / OBC-NCL certificate need to be submitted again if the previously submitted certificate is not valid until the end of the current financial year. I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any fee waiver category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any fee waiver category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? Please be informed that you will not be paying the entire Program fee or Foundational Level fee at one stretch. The actual fees you will be paying will be in proportion to the number of courses you register for in every term. So, if you register for 2 courses in the January 2021 Term, you have to pay the course fees only for those 2 courses. In the Fee Structure section, select your goal to be able to see a detailed PDF with break down of course fee over each term. Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? The personal email ID you applied for the program with cannot be changed. This email ID is used to access the whole Qualifier Process and the Foundational Level Course Registration Form. Once all the documents uploaded in the Foundational Level Course Registration Form are approved, each registered learner will be assigned a roll number and a corresponding official IIT Madras Online Degree student email ID. After that, all further communication and course access will be through the official student email ID. Is it possible to get an educational loan for this Program? Is it possible to get an educational loan for this Program? We are working on the process of getting the bank loans approved for this Program. Please do look out for updates from our side on this. Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? No, the current portal will be used for all the Levels. You will be given a new official IITM Online Degree student email ID to access the portal. Will I be issued an ID card? Will I be issued an ID card? An ID card in electronic format will be provided, subject to conditions on use of ID card. Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level? Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level? The BSc Degree has to be completed within a maximum period of 6 years. While a 1 or 2 year break between Levels is allowed, we recommend that you time the length of your breaks depending on whether you want to pursue a Diploma or Degree, and how many courses you are able to take up in a term. I'm eligible to apply 4 courses in the upcoming term, but I have only 2 Foundational Level courses left to complete. Will I be allowed to register for Diploma Level courses along with the Foundational Level courses? I'm eligible to apply 4 courses in the upcoming term, but I have only 2 Foundational Level courses left to complete. Will I be allowed to register for Diploma Level courses along with the Foundational Level courses? No, you have to complete all the 8 courses in Foundation Level before enrolling to the Diploma Level courses. What is the eligiblity to write the End Term Exam for a course? What is the eligiblity to write the End Term Exam for a course? To be eligible to write the End Term Exam for a course, it is mandatory for the learner to have (i) obtained in the course an Average Assignment Score >= 40/100 AND (ii) appeared for at least one out of the three proctored in-person Quizzes. Learners who are not eligible to write a specific course's End Term Exam will not be issued hall ticket for the same. They will have to repeat the entire course including assignments and quizzes in a later term. Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes? Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes? It is mandatory to attempt at least one of the three proctored in-person quizzes in a term to be eligible to appear for the End Term Exams. Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End Term? Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End Term? For the courses you register for immediately after clearing your Qualifier Exam, yes, your Qualifier phase assignment scores will be included while calculating eligibility for the End Term Exam. For courses that you register for in a later term, you will be required to repeat the assignments completed in the Qualifier phase. Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent term? Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent term? The Qualifier Exam Score will be counted as Quiz 1 Score for the courses registered in the Foundation level in the term immediately after the Qualifier exam. What will happen if I am absent for an End Term Exam? What will happen if I am absent for an End Term Exam? Learner has two options: 1. Register for the course in the subsequent term with the option of taking the End Term Exam alone and by paying a reduced fee (Rs.1000 per Foundational Level course and Rs.2000 per Diploma / Degree Level Course). 2. Repeat the entire course (including assignments and quizzes) by paying the full course fee. What is the procedure to add / drop a course? What is the procedure to add / drop a course? Once the registration window closes in any term, adding courses will not be allowed. Dropping a course will be allowed within 4 weeks of the term start. Can I get a refund if I drop a course within the first four weeks of the term start? Can I get a refund if I drop a course within the first four weeks of the term start? For courses dropped within the first four weeks of the term, admin charges will be retained and the balance course fee, if any, will be refunded. Admin charges for a Foundational Level course is Rs.2000 and the admin charges for a Diploma  / Degree Level course is Rs.4000. For learners who registered to take exams outside India, 50% of End Term Exam Fee for the dropped course will be refunded. If such a learner chooses to drop all courses in a term, 50% of Quiz 2 & Quiz 3 fee will also be refunded. For more details, please refer to the operations document shared with registered students named "Part II - Foundation + Diploma" under section "13.7. Dropping a Course". Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades? Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades? Though it is not recommended, a learner may choose to repeat a course for improving grades any number of times. The course fee for repeating a course will be twice the regular course fee and the learner will have to submit the online graded weekly assignments, appear for the Quiz(zes) and End Term Exam. The highest score among all attempts of a course will be used for calculating the CGPA. What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? Please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in How can I change the exam city within India? How can I change the exam city within India? Each exam has a deadline before which change of exam city is allowed. Option to change the exam city will be available till each deadline in the student Dashboard, in the "Exam Cities and Hall Tickets" page. Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\google8530c0481d7d1a9d.html
google-site-verification: google8530c0481d7d1a9d.html
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\helpvideos.html
Short Videos to Help You Understand our Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BSc Degree Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calendar Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Houses & Societies PARADOX / Student Festivals School Connect Achievements Recognition 1. Toppers Page 2. Student's Best Projects 3. Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Resources Help Videos Help Videos Short video clips to help better understand the IIT Madras Online
          Degree Program in Programming and Data Science. Help Video 1 of 12 Why an Online Degree Initiative from IIT Madras? Help Video 2 of 12 Why Learn Programming and Data Science? Help Video 3 of 12 Who is this Program Designed for? What is the Eligibility to
              apply? Help Video 4 of 12 Overall Structure of the Program Help Video 5 of 12 The Three Levels of the Program Help Video 6 of 12 Foundational Level of the Program Help Video 7 of 12 Diploma Level of the Program Help Video 8 of 12 Degree Level of the Program Help Video 9 of 12 Fee Structure of the Program Help Video 10 of 12 Admission Process without a Typical Entrance Exam Help Video 11 of 12 What is the Qualifier Process? Help Video 12 of 12 Qualifier Exam and Qualifying Criteria Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\honour_code.html
Honour Code English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BSc Degree Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calendar Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Houses & Societies PARADOX / Student Festivals School Connect Achievements Recognition 1. Toppers Page 2. Student's Best Projects 3. Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Privacy Policy | Terms of Service | Code of Conduct | Honour Code Honour Code Effective Date: 15/06/2020 In order to participate in IIT Madras online degree programme, you must
        agree to the Honor Code given below and any additional terms specific to
        a course or program. This Honor Code, and any additional terms, will be
        posted on our website - study.iitm.ac.in/ds. Honour Code Pledge By registering in an IIT Madras Online Degree programme, I agree that I
        will: ● Complete all tests and assignments on my own, unless collaboration on
        an assignment is explicitly permitted. ● Maintain only one user account, unless IIT Madras has approved the use
        of a separate user account in connection with an employer-sponsored or
        university-sponsored program. ● Not let anyone else use my username and/or password. ● Not
        engage in any activity that would dishonestly improve my results, or
        improve or hurt the results of others. ● Not engage in any activity that will cause grief or harm to the online
        degree websites/portals or study materials, including activities like
        hacking or accessing restricted materials. ● Not post answers to problems that are being used to assess learner
        performance either inside the course forums or in any other website. ● Not resubmit or submit work (in identical or similar form) for
        multiple assignments without prior explicit approval. ● Not
        submit false or altered or fabricated admission documents including
        signatures or certificates of enrollment or standing, registration
        forms, and medical certifications. Violations If you are found in violation of the Terms of Service or Honor Code, you
        may be subject to one or more of the following actions: ● Receiving a zero or no credit for an assignment; ● Having any certificate/degree earned in the course or programme
        withheld or revoked; ● Being unenrolled from a course or
        programme; or ● Termination of your use of the IIT Madras
        ONLINE DEGREE Site. ● Additional actions may be taken at the sole discretion of IIT
        Madras. ● No refunds will be issued in the case of any corrective action for
        such violations. Honor Code violations will be determined at the sole discretion of IIT
        Madras. You will be notified if a determination has been made that you
        have violated this Honor Code and you will be informed of the
        corresponding action that will be taken as a result of the violation. Changing the Honour Code Please note that we review and may make changes to this Honor Code from
        time to time. Any changes to this Honor Code will be effective
        immediately upon posting on study.iitm.ac.in/ds page, with an
        updated effective date. By accessing the IIT Madras ONLINE DEGREE Site
        after any changes have been made, you signify your agreement on a
        prospective basis to the modified Honor Code and any changes contained
        therein. Be sure to return to this page periodically to ensure
        familiarity with the most current version of this Honor Code. Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\index.html
IIT Madras Degree Program in Data Science and Applications English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BSc Degree Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calendar Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Houses & Societies PARADOX / Student Festivals School Connect Achievements Recognition 1. Toppers Page 2. Student's Best Projects 3. Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Share this page with your friends and family on IIT Madras, India's top technical institute, welcomes you to the world's first 4-year Bachelor of Science (BS) Degree in Data Science and Applications with options to exit earlier in the foundation, diploma or BSc degree level. For the first time, you can work towards an undergraduate degree / diploma from an IIT regardless of your age, location, or academic backgrounds. More than 29000 students currently studying with us in the program. For more details For Fee structure 20,000+ Students doing this program along with another degree 3000+ Working Professionals studying in the program 850+ Secured Admission to Masters/PhD programs within and outside India 20+ BS students in Top 100 Ranks of GATE Exam 2024 Best Online Program Awarded by QS Reimagine Education & The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania Scholarship Learners from < 5LPA eligible for up to 75% fee waivers. 2000+ students study for free No Age Limit Learners from any age and any where in the world can study in this program. Current age of learners : 17 to 81 years. Mode of Study Pre-recorded and synchronous sessions, Weekly Online Assignments, In-person quizzes Data science Courses ML Foundations, Deep Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Computer Vision, LLMs, Big Data Programming Courses Python, Java, PostGreSQL, Linux commands, C programming, Full Stack Application Development Frameworks and Libraries Flask, Vue, NumPy, Scikitlearn, Pytorch, OpenCV, Kafka and many more relevant for Data Science applications Business Courses Business Data Management, Business Analytics, Tools in Data Science, Financial Forensics, Market Research, Managerial Economics All Announcements / Updates Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\inthemedia.html
About IIT Madras Degree Program in the Media English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BSc Degree Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calendar Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Houses & Societies PARADOX / Student Festivals School Connect Achievements Recognition 1. Toppers Page 2. Student's Best Projects 3. Teaching Assistance Testimonials Research and Publication Events FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships Placements SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Resources In the Media In the Media An archive of news articles and video coverages about IIT Madras
            Online Degree Program in Programming and Data Science with links to
            view them. Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\launch.html
PARADOX'22 Student Festival Organised by the students of IITM BS Degree Program at the IIT Madras Campus 20th, 21st & 22nd May 2022 1500+ Programming & Data Science students of IIT Madras attended the first on-campus three day
                festival, which was fully curated and organised by the students. This was a huge platform for
                interaction between fellow students, faculty, industry experts, and companies. Paradox '22 also marked the formal distribution of provisional diploma certificates to 101 students,
                including 17 students from families of income less than ₹1 lakh per annum. Sports Previous Next As an icebreaker and warm-up to the three day festival, a whole series of games (chess, table
        tennis, box cricket, football 5s, etc.) were organised where students competed against each other. On day two,
        over 700 participants woke up early for a 5km run / walk exploring the beautiful, green IIT Madras campus. The
        fastest runner completed the five kilometres in 19 minutes and 38 seconds! The much awaited faculty vs students
        cricket match on day two drew in a lot of spectators cheering on while the faculty team went ahead to win the
        match. Interactive Sessions Previous Next The Director of IIT Madras, Prof. V.Kamakoti, formally addressed the gathering of 1500+ students
        at the SAC Auditorium and with that began a series of formal and informal interactive sessions with the faculty
        and instructors of the BS Degree program. This was also a platform where students with the 10 best projects were
        selected to present them to a larger audience for discussion and feedback. Being a unique program with students of all age groups and of varying educational / professional
        backgrounds,
        students were able to learn a lot from meeting and interacting each other as well. Cultural Events Previous Next Cultural events during the IITM Paradox included competitive events and entertainment events.
        Students who participated in competitive events such as Controversia (Debate), Qutopia (Quiz) and Hack-o-pitch
        were evaluated by a panel of judges and mentors who picked the winners and also gave valuable feedback for all
        participants and spectators to learn from. The evenings were for unwinding. Students from across the country put on a wonderful display of
        their talents on
        stage in the form of open mic, music and dance. On day two, all faculty and students joined in for a festive
        dinner under the stars at the open air theatre, and enjoyed the late night screening of a movie together. Workshops Previous Next Apart from the talks and project presentations, spanning over two days, there were a
            total of nine professional workshops conducted at different seminar halls that the students could pick to
            attend. These workshops were conducted by IIT Madras Faculty. Over a hundred students signed up for and
            attended each of these workshops. Company Discussions Previous Next Day three was marked with Placement Cell interaction, sessions by IITM Incubation Cell, IITM
        Research Park, panel discussions and Q&A sessions. The panel discussion titled "Is Data the eternal fuel?" was attended by industry leaders in the
        field of data
        science and data analytics from IBM Client Innovation Center India, Renault Nissan Technology and Business
        Center India, Walmart Global Tech India, Capgemini, TCS, Latent view. The Q&A session that followed with the
        topic of "Careers in Data Science" were answered by leaders from Tech Mahindra, Infosys Springboard Program,
        Aditya Birla Management Corporation Pvt Ltd, L&T Construction, Power Transmission & Distribution, Tiger
        Analytics, Walmart Labs India. Additionally, Startups by IITM BS degree students were showcased and judged in an exhibit by
        professors and
        industry experts. Sponsors Main Sponsor Tiger Analytics is an advanced analytics and AI consulting company enabling enterprises to generate
                  business value through data. They are the trusted data sciences and data engineering partner for
                  several Fortune 500 firms. They bring expertise in marketing science, customer analytics, and
                  operations & planning analytics. Other Sponsors
Companies and organizations can partner, contribute and benefit in the following ways: 1. Knowledge Partners 2. CSR Partners 3. “Professionals Speak” on current industry and technology trends 4. Mentorship of students 5. Internships and Recruitment 6. Support your employees upskill with a
                    Diploma in Programming or Data Science or both Knowledge Partners Top leaders / researchers from companies such as Google, Flipkart, Paypal, Gramener are contributing content to the courses in the Diploma level , drawing from their rich experience on the ground and
                    sharing with our learners. Insights from Industry leaders are vital to nurture future talent in the
                    area
                    of Data Science. CSR Partners IIT Madras has instituted Merit-cum-Means scholarships for its students with CSR support from various companies. These funds will support deserving students with their tuition fees, making IIT Madras more accessible for everyone. Companies such as Verizon India, L&T Technology Services, L&T Thales Technology Services Private Limited, Dun & Bradstreet, Natesan, Synchrocones, Walmart, Renault-Nissan, Ram Shriram Foundation, Tata AIA, Tiger Analytics, Cargill Business Services, Cochin Shipyard and RR Donnelley have generously contributed to institute merit-cum-means scholarships to remove financial blocks from the path of economically disadvantaged students thirsting to learn from the best. More than 1700 students with family income less than 5LPA are currently being supported in their journey of earning Diplomas and the BS degree from IIT Madras. We profoundly thank our donors for their generous support. We are very glad to share that as the implementing institute, the IIT Madras BS Degree Program has been recognized with: The ASSOCHAM CSR and Sustainability Award for Excellence in Supporting Education and Skill for 2022 ( Article1 ) The CSRUniverse Social Impact Awards 2023 in the Education category ( Article2 ) All CSR funds are routed through IIT Madras which is the authorized body to receive CSR donations from companies. Currently, there are 22,000+ students pursuing the IIT Madras BS Degree program. The program takes in students 3 times a year; around 7500 new students join our program each year, of which 25-30% fall in the < 5lpa category. Appeal to donors Due to increasing educational costs, financial assistance is more than ever required. We believe that funding through CSR will make a real, significant impact on the lives of our students. Here is a glimpse of the eligible students who are awaiting support. Annual Family Income < 1Lakh Annual Family Income 1 to 5 lakhs Total Female 155 154 309 Male 1267 744 2011 Total 1422 898 2320 If you wish to obtain more details on how you can create an impact by donating to our causes, please refer to the Proposal for CSR Support for Merit-cum-Means Scholarship document and write to jayabala@study.iitm.ac.in for any further information needed in this regard. The 1700+ students supported through industry CSR support are from the lengths and breadths of our country. Hear from our student beneficiaries HSBC scholarship beneficiaries: Other CSR beneficiaries: “Professionals Speak” on current industry and technology trends Employees of Industry partners who have more than 10+ years of experience in relevant fields have
                    delivered multiple talks on topics related to application development, programming and data science. This gives students in the course a valuable opportunity to interact with experienced professionals
                    and get a perspective on the latest technological trends in top companies. More than 50 sessions
                    have been delivered so far by professionals from companies such as IBM, CapGemini, Infosys, etc. The
                    links to the expert sessions from the industry are given in this sheet . BSBT4001 Degree Level Course Algorithmic Thinking in Bioinformatics To prepare students to develop an algorithmic thinking to address key data science challenges in bioinformatics, to acquire knowledge of various problem formulations and algorithm paradigms, which have transformed the field of biomedicine in modern times, to obtain insights into many key bioinformatics algorithms on strings, trees, and graphs, many of which can be applied to other areas as well. Course ID: BSBT4001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Why computational biology? WEEK 2 Where in the Genome Does DNA Replication Begin? - Algorithmic warmup (frequent exact/inexact k-mers in a string). WEEK 3 Which DNA Patterns Play the Role of Molecular Clocks? - Randomized Algorithms (randomized motif search, Gibbs sampling). WEEK 4 How Do We Assemble Genomes? - Graph Algorithms (Eulerian paths, de Bruijn graphs). WEEK 5 How Do We Compare Biological Sequences? - Dynamic Programming (edit distance, single/multiple sequence alignment). WEEK 6 Which Animal Gave Us SARS? - Evolutionary Tree Reconstruction (distance-based phylogeny, neighbor-joining algorithm). WEEK 7 How Did Yeast Become a Winemaker? - Clustering Algorithms (hard and soft k-means). WEEK 8 How Do We Locate Disease-Causing Mutations? - Combinatorial Pattern Matching (suffix trees/arrays, Burrows-Wheeler transform). WEEK 9 Why Have Biologists Still Not Developed an HIV Vaccine? - Hidden Markov Models (Viterbi and forward–backward algorithms). WEEK 10 Was T. rex Just a Big Chicken? - Computational Proteomics (peptide identification and spectral match). WEEK 11 Which Motifs Are Hidden in a Biological Network? - Randomized Algorithms (colour coding for long paths in graphs). + Show all weeks View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSBT4002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSBT4002 Degree Level Course Big Data and Biological Networks To enable the students to “understand” biological data,  to represent, and analyze various datasets from a network perspective, to encourage network thinking applied to problems across disciplines, to understand various network models used to model real-world networks, to apply network analytics techniques to understand biological networks, to implement basic network analysis algorithms in Python, to learn different AI/ML problem formulations for biological data, and to apply AI/ML techniques for analysis of biological data using Python. by Dr. Nirav P Bhatt , Karthik Raman , Prof. Himanshu Sinha Course ID: BSBT4002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to Biological Big Data. Information Flow in Biological Systems. WEEK 2 Omics datasets: Various flavours of big biological datasets (genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, etc.). WEEK 3 Introduction to Graph theory. History. Types of graphs. Representing biological networks. WEEK 4 Network structure: Key parameters, measures of centrality WEEK 5 Key Network Models: Erdos-Renyi, Watts-Strogatz (small-world) and Barabasi-Albert (power-law models) WEEK 6 Network clustering/community detection. Identifying motifs in networks. Studying network perturbations. WEEK 7 Applications of network biology: Predicting drug targets, predicting drug molecules, synthesis of new molecules (chemoinformatics) WEEK 8 Applications of network biology: Epidemiology, Centrality-lethality hypothesis. WEEK 9 AI & ML for Biological Data Analysis. Introduction to AI & ML tasks in biological networks. WEEK 10 Biological network reconstruction from omics and literature data WEEK 11 Property prediction using network data. Node classification and link prediction. WEEK 12 Analysis of heterogeneous and multi-layer/multiplex networks. Future Perspectives. + Show all weeks About the Instructors Dr. Nirav P Bhatt Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Biotechnology,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr Nirav P Bhatt earned his Bachelor in Chemical Engineering from The M S University of Baroda, Masters in Chemical Engineering from IIT Madras, and Docteur es Science (DSc) from EPFL, Switzerland. Currently, He is Assistant Professor with Bio Tech Department in IIT Madras. less Karthik Raman Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Biotechnology,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Karthik Raman is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras since April 2011. His research interests are in the areas of metabolic network analysis, with applications in metabolic engineering and drug target identification. He received his Ph.D. in 2009 from the lab of Prof. Nagasuma Chandra at the Supercomputer Education and Research Centre at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. His Ph.D. thesis involved the computational analysis of metabolic networks and protein-protein interaction networks in Mycobacterium tuberculosis, for the prediction of potential drug targets. Following his Ph.D., Karthik was a post-doctoral researcher at the lab of Prof. Dr. Andreas Wagner, at the University of Zürich, Switzerland. Karthik’s post-doctoral research was involved the analysis of signalling circuits in yeast as well as synthetic logic circuits, for their robustness and evolvability. less Prof. Himanshu Sinha Associate Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Biotechnology,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Himanshu Sinha is an Associate Professor at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras in the Department of Biotechnology. He is also a Co-ordinator for the Initiative for Biological Systems Engineering. His research Area is Complex Genetics, Systems Biology.He received his Ph.D. in Department of Plant Science at the [Downing College, Cambridge University]. He carried out his postdoctorate at the Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC USA. He was a Senior Postdoc at Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. Following this he was a Reader at Department of Biological Sciences, TIFR, Mumbai, India. less View all Degree Level courses BSCS1001 Foundational Level Course Computational Thinking The students will be introduced to a number of programming concepts using illustrative examples which will be solved almost entirely manually. The manual execution of each solution allows for close inspection of the concepts being discussed. by Madhavan Mukund , Dr. G Venkatesh Course ID: BSCS1001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Applying a procedural approach to real life problems: sequencing basic steps, identifying common patterns. Communicating procedural descriptions: flowcharts, pseudo-code. Understanding underlying abstractions used in programming, through examples: variables, iteration, accumulation, filtering, parametrised procedures, polymorphism and state. Selecting appropriate data structures to store relationships between data: lists, trees, matrices, graphs. Identifying algorithmic techniques to solve a given problem: searching, sorting, indexing, matching. Decomposing problems into smaller units to find a solution: recursion, divide and conquer. Understanding and checking algorithms: predict their behaviour, design tests to verify their output, perform simple debugging. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Variables, Initialization, Iterators, Filtering, Datatypes, Flowcharts, Sanity of data WEEK 2 Iteration, Filtering, Selection, Pseudocode, Finding max and min, AND operator WEEK 3 Multiple iterations (non-nested), Three prizes problem, Procedures, Parameters, Side effects, OR operator WEEK 4 Nested iterations, Birthday paradox, Binning WEEK 5 List, Insertion sort WEEK 6 Table, Dictionar WEEK 7 Graph, Matrix WEEK 8 Adjacency matrix, Edge labelled graph WEEK 9 Backtracking, Tree, Depth First Search (DFS), Recursion WEEK 10 Object oriented programming, Class, Object, Encapsulation, Abstraction, Information hiding, Access specifiers WEEK 11 Message passing, Remote Procedure Call (RPC), Cache memory, Parallelism, Concurrency, Polling, Preemption, Multithreading, Producer Consumer, Atomicity, Consistency, Race condition, Deadlock, Broadcasting WEEK 12 Top-down approach, Bottom-up approach, Decision tree, Numerical prediction, Behaviour analysis, Classification + Show all weeks About the Instructors Madhavan Mukund Director,
                           
                           
                           
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals. ... more He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014. In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2002 -
                                    Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python , BSCS2005 -
                                    Programming Concepts using Java and BSMA1001 -
                                    Mathematics for Data Science I Dr. G Venkatesh Professor of Practice,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Venkatesh is a Professor of Practice at IIT Madras, where he is involved with several projects in the field of education. He is also a Fellow and Director of Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd, a leading Indian R&D services provider, and a founder of Mylspot, an education technology startup that aims to bridge knowledge gaps of students through a mentored learning platform. ... more Dr Venkatesh is a graduate in electronics from IIT Madras, PhD in Computer Science from TIFR, Mumbai and was a faculty member of the Computer Science & Engineering Dept of IIT Bombay for 8 years where his research interests revolved around declarative languages and their application to the design of embedded systems. He moved to the industry when Sasken was being formed, where he led their technology activities for over two decades. He was a visiting/adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore for 10 years and a Chair Professor in the department of EE at IIT Madras for 3 years. Dr. Venkatesh was elected as a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineers in 2006 and the IETE in 2012. He won the Technomentor award of the Indian Electronics and Semiconductor Association in 2013 and the Vasvik award for industrial research in 2015. Dr. Venkatesh serves on a number of government, industry and investor committees and boards in the areas of microelectronics, telecommunications and education. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSMS2001 -
                                    Business Data Management and BSMS2002 -
                                    Business Analytics View all Foundational Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSCS1002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations BSCS1002 Foundational Level Course Programming in Python This will be the first formal programming course that students will see in this programme. The goal of this course is to introduce Python programming, which is used throughout the programme, with a basic problem solving and algorithmic flavour. by Sudarshan Iyengar Course ID: BSCS1002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites: BSCS1001 -  Computational Thinking What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Using basic programming concepts such as variables, expressions, loops, conditionals and functions in Python Creating, manipulating, and using more Python specific features such as lists, tuples, and dictionaries Familiarising with and using common Python libraries such as random, math, datetime, scipy, matplotlib, Pandas etc Analysing real life activities and casting them as programming problems Applying programming concepts to analyse and solve diverse problems Writing Readable code and debugging it Building small applications using python Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to algorithms WEEK 2 Conditionals WEEK 3 Conditionals (Continued) WEEK 4 Iterations and Ranges WEEK 5 Iterations and Ranges (Continued) WEEK 6 Basic Collections in Python WEEK 7 Basic Collections in Python (Continued) WEEK 8 Basic Collections in Python (Continued) WEEK 9 File Operations WEEK 10 File Operations (Continued) WEEK 11 Module system in python WEEK 12 Basic Pandas and Numpy processing of data + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Title: Python for Everybody. Author: Charles R. Severance. Publisher: Shroff Publishers. ISBN: 9789352136278 (The PDF of this book is currently available freely at http://do1.dr-chuck.com/pythonlearn/EN_us/pythonlearn.pdf) About the Instructors Sudarshan Iyengar Associate Professor and Head ,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Ropar Sudarshan Iyengar has a PhD from the Indian Institute of Science and is currently working as an Associate Professor and Head of CSE at IIT Ropar. less Visit website View all Foundational Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
BSCS2001 Diploma Level Course Database Management Systems A comprehensive introduction to databases, database management, and relevant topics like database security, integrity, concurrency, and data warehousing. by Partha Pratim Das Course ID: BSCS2001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Course Overview WEEK 2 Relational Model and Basic SQL WEEK 3 Intermediate and Advanced SQL WEEK 4 Relational Query Languages and Database Design WEEK 5 Functional Dependency and Normal Forms WEEK 6 Functional Dependency and Normal Forms (cont.) WEEK 7 Application Development WEEK 8 Storage Management WEEK 9 Indexing and Hashing WEEK 10 Transactions WEEK 11 Backup and Recovery WEEK 12 Query Optimization and Conclusion + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Database Management Systems - Abraham Silberschatz , Henry F. Korth, S. Sudarshan About the Instructors Partha Pratim Das Professor,
                           
                            
                                Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Kharagpur Dr. Das obtained his B Tech, M Tech and Ph D degrees in1984, 1985 and 1988 respectively from IIT Kharagpur. He served as a faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur from 1988 to 1998. In 1998, he moved to the Industry and served in Senior Director positions. In 2011, Dr. Das joined back the Department as a Professor. He is the Joint PI of National Digital Library of India project of MoE and leads the national initiative to integrate the digital learning contents. ... more Dr. Das is a regular contributor to the SWAYAM Program and his courses on Programming in C++, Object Oriented Analysis and Design, and Data Base Management Systems have been attended by thousands of students since 2017. Over the last decade he has been teaching Compilers, Software Engineering, Image Processing, Foundations of Algorithms & Machine Learning, and Principles of Programming Languages for which he received top students’ feedback 6 times during 2014 to 2018. Dr. Das has published over 50 papers in international journals in his interest areas spanning Computer Vision, Digital Learning, Digital Geometry, Human-Computer Interaction, Medical Image Analysis, Computer Analysis of Indian Classical Dance, and Productivity in Software Engineering. less View all Diploma Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
            BSCS2002 Diploma Level Course Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python A good foundation course to introduce basic concepts in the design and analysis of algorithms as well as standard data structures, using Python as a base language for implementing these. by Madhavan Mukund Course ID: BSCS2002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Evaluating asymptotic upper bounds for algorithms using big O notation Using standard data structures such as lists, arrays, stacks, queues, heaps Comparing algorithms for sorting and searching Representing, manipulating and analysing graphs Mastering algorithm design techniques such as divide and conquer and dynamic programming Applying linear programming and network flows to model computational problems. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Python Refresher WEEK 2 Complexity, Notations, Sorting and Searching Algorithms WEEK 3 Arrays, Lists, Stacks, Queues, Hashing WEEK 4 Graph Algorithms WEEK 5 Graph Algorithms (Continued) WEEK 6 Union-Find Data Structure, Priority Queue, Heap, Binary Search Tree WEEK 7 Balanced Search Tree, Greedy Algorithms WEEK 8 Divide and Conquer WEEK 9 Dynamic Programming WEEK 10 String or Pattern Matching Algorithms WEEK 11 Network Flows, Linear Programming, Class of Algorithms WEEK 12 Summary + Show all weeks About the Instructors Madhavan Mukund Director,
                           
                           
                           
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals. ... more He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014. In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking , BSCS2005 -
                                    Programming Concepts using Java and BSMA1001 -
                                    Mathematics for Data Science I View all Diploma Level courses BSCS2003 Diploma Level Course Modern Application Development I Building a modern application involves many different aspects: front end, recording transactions, storage, connecting to a remote server, using APIs etc. The courses Modern Application Development I and II go through all these aspects through a detailed and evolving case study, teaching the relevant programming skills as the course progresses. by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2003 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Co-requisites: BSCS2001 -  Database Management Systems What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS To be able to design a web application To be able to distinguish between the frontend, the backend, and the database activities To create such an application with Python and MySQL Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Basic terminologies of Web WEEK 2 Webpages written in HTML and CSS WEEK 3 Presentation layer - View WEEK 4 Models - Introduction to databases WEEK 5 Controllers - Business logic WEEK 6 APIs and REST APIs WEEK 7 Backend Systems WEEK 8 Application Frontend WEEK 9 Application Security WEEK 10 Testing of Web Applications WEEK 11 HTML Evolution and Beyond HTML WEEK 12 Application Deployment + Show all weeks About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
                           
                            
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2006 -
                                     BSCS2003P Diploma Level Course Modern Application Development I - Project "Modern Application Development - I project" is a comprehensive course designed to introduce learners to the fundamentals of web application development. The course covers essential technologies such as HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Flask, API implementation, and SQLite for data storage. Learners will gain practical knowledge in building secure, efficient, and deployable web applications while understanding key concepts in web development. by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2003P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Co-requisites: BSCS2003 -  Modern Application Development I Project Course Overview The objective of this course project is to provide hands-on experience in developing a web application from scratch, integrating various technologies taught throughout the course. Students will apply their knowledge to create a functional web application that incorporates secure authentication, efficient data management, and API integration. The project aims to reinforce understanding of key concepts, foster problem-solving skills, and enhance proficiency in web application development. What you’ll learn Upon completing this course project, learners will acquire proficiency in HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Flask, and SQLite, enabling them to develop robust web applications. Students will gain practical experience in implementing secure authentication mechanisms, optimizing application performance, and integrating APIs to enhance functionality. The project will equip learners with skills in deploying web applications, considering security measures, and ensuring efficient data storage and retrieval. Best Projects Puneet Bhagat (21f1004363@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Aniket Kalra (21f3002102@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project ANABIL KANUNGOE (21f1003580@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Rahul Kurian Jacob (21f1000481@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Rajashree Das (21f1003047@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
                           
                            
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I , BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II and BSCS3005 -
                                    Programming in C 
BSCS2004 Diploma Level Course Machine Learning Foundations This course lays the groundwork for the upcoming ML courses by covering various fundamentals that do not necessarily fall under Machine Learning but are quite necessary for a comprehensive understanding of Machine Learning. by Harish Guruprasad Ramaswamy , Arun Rajkumar , Prashanth LA Course ID: BSCS2004 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Recognising if a particular problem can be viewed as a Machine Learning problem. Breaking down standard Machine Learning problems into more fundamental problems using tools from Calculus, Linear Algebra, Probability and Optimisation. Recognising relationships between equation solving, projection onto a subspace, and the supervised learning problem of linear least squares regression. Visualising eigenvalue/eigenvectors as a property of a matrix, and recognising its potential in practical unsupervised learning problems like dimensionality reduction and image compression. Using, identifying failure modes, programming and debugging simple gradient descent methods for solving unconstrained optimisation problems. Recognising the value of simple models like Gaussian mixture models for data, constructing algorithms for learning the parameters of such models, and interpreting these parameters. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to machine learning WEEK 2 Calculus WEEK 3 Linear Algebra - Least Squares Regression WEEK 4 Linear Algebra - Eigenvalues and eigenvectors WEEK 5 Linear Algebra - Symmetric matrices WEEK 6 Linear Algebra - Singular value decomposition, Principal Component Analysis in Image Processing WEEK 7 Unconstrained Optimisation WEEK 8 Convex sets, functions, and optimisation problems WEEK 9 Constrained Optimisation and Lagrange Multipliers. Logistic regression as an optimization problem WEEK 10 Examples of probabilistic models in machine learning problems WEEK 11 Exponential Family of distributions WEEK 12 Parameter estimation. Expectation Maximization. + Show all weeks About the Instructors Harish Guruprasad Ramaswamy Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I am currently an assistant professor at the computer science and engineering (CSE) department of IIT Madras. My primary areas of interest are in machine learning, statistical learning theory and optimisation. I was previously a research scientist at IBM research labs and a post-doc at University of Michigan. I completed my PhD at the Computer Science and Automation (CSA) department of the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore advised by Prof. Shivani Agarwal. I have been fortunate to work with Profs. Ambuj Tewari and Clayton Scott during my PhD and postdoc. Earlier, I finished my M.E. under the supervision of Prof. Chiranjib Bhattacharyya. less Visit website Arun Rajkumar Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I am currently an Assistant Professor at the Computer Science and Engineering department of IIT Madras. Prior to joining IIT Madras, I was a research scientist at the Xerox Research Center (now Conduent Labs), Bangalore for three years. I earned my Ph.D from the Indian Institute of Science where I worked on 'Ranking from Pairwise Comparisons'. My research interests are in the areas of Machine learning, statistical learning theory with applications to education and healthcare. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2007 -
                                    Machine Learning Techniques Prashanth LA Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prashanth L.A. is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. Prior to this, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland - College Park from 2015 to 2017 and at INRIA Lille - Team SequeL from 2012 to 2014. From 2002 to 2009, he was with Texas Instruments (India) Pvt Ltd, Bangalore, India. ... more He received his Masters and Ph.D degrees in Computer Science and Automation from Indian Institute of Science, in 2008 and 2013, respectively.  He was awarded the third prize for his Ph.D. dissertation, by the IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Society (ITSS). He is the coauthor of a book entitled `Stochastic Recursive Algorithms for Optimization: Simultaneous Perturbation Methods', published by Springer in 2013. His research interests are in reinforcement learning, simulation optimization and multi-armed bandits, with applications in transportation systems, wireless networks and recommendation systems. 

BSCS2005 Diploma Level Course Programming Concepts using Java This course uses Java to provide an understanding of core ideas in object oriented programming, exception handling, event driven programming, concurrent programming and functional programming. by Madhavan Mukund Course ID: BSCS2005 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Creating simple object-oriented programs in Java Understanding encapsulation, separating interface from implementation Implementing abstraction through a hierarchy of classes and objects Dealing gracefully with errors and exceptions Controlling concurrent access to data through locks, semaphores and monitors Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Class Hierarchy WEEK 2 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Inheritance, Overriding WEEK 3 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Polymorphism WEEK 4 Basic Object Oriented Programming: Abstract Classes WEEK 5 Collections. Iterators. WEEK 6 Generics. Callbacks. WEEK 7 Cloning. I/O serializations. Packages WEEK 8 Cloning. I/O serializations. Packages (Continued) WEEK 9 Exception handling WEEK 10 Concurrent programming WEEK 11 Concurrent programming (Continued) WEEK 12 Concurrent programming (Continued) + Show all weeks About the Instructors Madhavan Mukund Director,
                           
                           
                           
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals. ... more He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014. In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking , BSCS2002 -
                                    Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python and BSMA1001 -
                                    Mathematics for Data Science I 

BSCS2006 Diploma Level Course Modern Application Development II Building a modern application involves many different aspects: front end, recording transactions, storage, connecting to a remote server, using APIs etc. The courses Modern Application Development I and II go through all these aspects through a detailed and evolving case study, teaching the relevant programming skills as the course progresses. by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2006 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites: BSCS2003 -  Modern Application Development I What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS To be able to build highly interactive frontends using Vue To be able to integrate the Vue frontend with the backend viva APIs To learn best practices involved in designing web APIs, and authentication mechanisms To be able to handle asynchronous backend jobs execution To be able to implement caching, and performance measurement for a web application To be able to distinguish between the frontend, the backend, and the database activities Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Basics of JavaScript WEEK 2 Advanced JavaScript WEEK 3 Introduction to Web Frontend WEEK 4 Introduction to VueJS WEEK 5 Vue with APIs WEEK 6 Advanced Vuejs WEEK 7 Advanced State Management WEEK 8 Authentication and Designing APIs WEEK 9 Asynchronous Jobs WEEK 10 Inter-Service Messaging and Webhooks WEEK 11 Performance WEEK 12 Project + Show all weeks About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
                           
                            
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS3005 -
                                    Programming in C 
BSCS2006P Diploma Level Course Modern Application Development II - Project "Modern Application Development - II project" is an advanced course designed to build upon the foundations of web application development introduced in "Modern Application Development - I." The course focuses on advanced frontend technologies, such as Vue.js, to create interactive and sophisticated user interfaces. It also covers additional concepts like token-based authentication, asynchronous task execution using Celery and Redis, caching, and security considerations.
 
The course covers some important concepts of web like Token-based Authentication, Asynchronous Task Execution with Celery and Redis, Caching Techniques. The course also talks about Security and Privacy Considerations and Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS). by Thejesh G N , Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS2006P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites: BSCS2003P -  Modern Application Development I - Project Co-requisites: BSCS2006 -  Modern Application Development II Project Course Overview The objective of this course project is to provide learners with hands-on experience in developing advanced web applications using Vue.js and related technologies. Students will work on building a functional web application that incorporates interactive frontend components, efficient state management using Vuex, token-based authentication for enhanced security, and asynchronous task execution using Celery and Redis. The project aims to reinforce knowledge gained in "Modern Application Development - I" and introduce advanced concepts in web development. What you’ll learn Proficiency in advanced frontend technologies such as Vue.js, Vue Router, and Vuex, enabling them to build interactive and dynamic user interfaces. Understanding and implementation of token-based authentication for secure user authentication and authorization. Knowledge and practical experience in using Celery and Redis for asynchronous task execution, improving application performance and scalability. Familiarity with caching techniques to optimize data retrieval and enhance application efficiency. Understanding of security and privacy considerations in web development, including handling CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) and ensuring secure user interactions. Best Projects JAIDEV VIVEK DESHPANDE (21f1003751@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project LOLLA AJAY KUMAR (21f1000200@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project Afnan Ahmad (21f1003730@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project VIGNESHWARAN S (21f1004210@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project HIMANSHU SANJAY SINGH SEEMA (21f1003237@ds.study.iitm.ac.in) View Project About the Instructors Thejesh G N Software Consultant,
                           
                            
                                IITM BSc Degree,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Thejesh GN is an Electronics and Communication graduate from Bangalore, India. He started his career as a software engineer at Infosys technologies limited. He was awarded Infosys Community Empathy Fellowship in 2010, which allowed him to work for a not-for-profit organization for a year. He was also a senior software engineer for NPTEL / CourseBuilder team, which is now offered as Seek, an Open Source Online Education delivery platform. ... more He loves free and open-source software. He has been an active contributor to various open-source projects. He was awarded IBM Champion in the years 2018 and 2019. Currently, he runs DataMeet – India's biggest Open Data Community and works as an Engineering Head. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I , BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II and BSCS3005 -
                                    Programming in C 
BSCS2007 Diploma Level Course Machine Learning Techniques To introduce the main methods and models used in machine learning problems of regression, classification and clustering. To study the properties of these models and methods and learn about their suitability for different problems. by Arun Rajkumar Course ID: BSCS2007 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Co-requisites: BSCS2004 -  Machine Learning Foundations What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Demonstrating In depth understanding of machine learning algorithms - model, objective or loss function, optimization algorithm and evaluation criteria. Tweaking machine learning algorithms based on the outcome of experiments - what steps to take in case of underfitting and overfitting. Being able to choose among multiple algorithms for a given task. Developing an understanding of unsupervised learning techniques. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction; Unsupervised Learning - Representation learning - PCA WEEK 2 Unsupervised Learning - Representation learning - Kernel PCA WEEK 3 Unsupervised Learning - Clustering - K-means/Kernel K-means WEEK 4 Unsupervised Learning - Estimation - Recap of MLE + Bayesian estimation, Gaussian Mixture Model - EM algorithm. WEEK 5 Supervised Learning - Regression - Least Squares; Bayesian view WEEK 6 Supervised Learning - Regression - Ridge/LASSO WEEK 7 Supervised Learning - Classification - K-NN, Decision tree WEEK 8 Supervised Learning - Classification - Generative Models - Naive Bayes WEEK 9 Discriminative Models - Perceptron; Logistic Regression WEEK 10 Support Vector Machines WEEK 11 Ensemble methods - Bagging and Boosting (Adaboost) WEEK 12 Artificial Neural networks: Multiclass classification. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Pattern Classification by David G. Stork, Peter E. Hart, and Richard O. Duda Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning by Christopher M. Bishop The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction by Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman About the Instructors Arun Rajkumar Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I am currently an Assistant Professor at the Computer Science and Engineering department of IIT Madras. Prior to joining IIT Madras, I was a research scientist at the Xerox Research Center (now Conduent Labs), Bangalore for three years. I earned my Ph.D from the Indian Institute of Science where I worked on 'Ranking from Pairwise Comparisons'. My research interests are in the areas of Machine learning, statistical learning theory with applications to education and healthcare. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2004 -
                                    Machine Learning Foundations 
BSCS2008 Diploma Level Course Machine Learning Practice This companion course to the ML Theory course introduces the student to scikit-learn, a popular Python machine learning module, to provide hands-on problem solving experience for all the methods and models learnt in the Theory course. by Ashish Tendulkar Course ID: BSCS2008 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites: BSCS2004 -  Machine Learning Foundations BSCS2007 -  Machine Learning Techniques What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Understand the life cycle of a machine learning project - typical steps involved and tools that can be used in each step. Using machine learning algorithms to solve practical problems using libraries like scikit-learn and tensorflow. Fine tuning the algorithms through regularization, feature selection, and better models. Develop an understanding of evaluation of machine learning algorithms and decide the next steps based on the analysis. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 End-to-end machine learning project on scikit-learn WEEK 2 Graph Theory(VOL 3) WEEK 3 Regression on scikit-learn - Linear regression
Gradient descent - batch and stochastic. WEEK 4 Polynomial regression, Regularized models WEEK 5 Logistic regression WEEK 6 Classification on scikit-learn - Binary classifier WEEK 7 Classification on scikit-learn - Multiclass classifier WEEK 8 Support Vector Machines using scikit-learn WEEK 9 Decision Trees, Ensemble Learning and Random Forests WEEK 10 Decision Trees, Ensemble Learning and Random Forests (Continued) WEEK 11 Neural networks models in scikit-learn WEEK 12 Unsupervised learning + Show all weeks About the Instructors Ashish Tendulkar Research Software Engineer,
                           
                            
                                Google AI,
                           
                           
                            Google Dr. Ashish Tendulkar is a researcher with Google Research Bangalore. He holds Masters and PhD from IIT Bombay. Before his current position, he was an Assistant Professor at IIT Madras and Head of data sciences at Persistent Systems Pune. Ashish is passionate about teaching ML and writing AI related contents in Indian languages. 
BSCS2008P Diploma Level Course Machine Learning Practice - Project The purpose of a machine learning project is to apply ML models learnt in ML courses, on real world data and to create an effective predictive model. Discover patterns in your data and then make predictions based on often complex findings to answer business questions, detect and analyze trends and help solve problems. by Ashish Tendulkar Course ID: BSCS2008P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Co-requisites: BSCS2008 -  Machine Learning Practice Project Course Overview The MLP Project is conducted on Kaggle platform. Kaggle is a well recognized platform among data science professionals that will familiarize you with many latest problems being currently solved by organizations across the world. Good place to practice your ML skills and knowledge. Looks good on your resume, especially if you have won medals and badges. The project runs for 12 to 15 weeks. The project is divided into several milestones. These milestones divide the ML cycle into smaller and manageable steps. These milestones guide you to make steady progress. What you’ll learn After completing the project you will gain experience of applying different ML techniques on real world data. You will gain proficiency in numpy, panda and sklearn libraries. You will become familiar with the 5 components of any ML project i.e. data, model, cost function, optimization and evaluation, i.e. in short, with complete end to end process of a machine learning project. In order to successfully complete the project, a viva will be conducted by an industry expert. This viva prepares you for ML interviews. About the Instructors Ashish Tendulkar Research Software Engineer,
                           
                            
                                Google AI,
                           
                           
                            Google Dr. Ashish Tendulkar is a researcher with Google Research Bangalore. He holds Masters and PhD from IIT Bombay. Before his current position, he was an Assistant Professor at IIT Madras and Head of data sciences at Persistent Systems Pune. Ashish is passionate about teaching ML and writing AI related contents in Indian languages. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2008 -
                                    Machine Learning Practice View all Diploma Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSCS3001.html

BSCS3001 Degree Level Course Software Engineering To prepare students to develop the essential skills required to become effective software engineers by introducing them to fundamental concepts in developing software, and essential practices employed by software developers, such as requirement gathering, creating software conceptual designs, software comprehension, debugging, testing and deployment. by Dr. Sridhar Iyer , Dr. Prajish Prasad Course ID: BSCS3001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Core Option I Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Deconstructing the software development process WEEK 2 Identify different types of software requirements (functional, non-functional) WEEK 3 Software Conceptual Design WEEK 4 Software Usability WEEK 5 Software Design - Modeling and Architecture WEEK 6 Software Design - Quality and Evaluation WEEK 7 Software Development - Program Comprehension WEEK 8 Software Development - Program Debugging WEEK 9 Software - Code Reviewing and Documentation WEEK 10 Software Testing WEEK 11 Software Deployment and Monitoring WEEK 12 Conclusion and other Aspects: Communication, Productivity and Organizations + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Software Engineering: A Precise Approach – Dr. Pankaj Jalote Cooperative Software Development – Dr. Amy Ko Engineering Software as a Service: An Agile Approach Using Cloud Computing –
Armando Fox, David Patterson About the Instructors Dr. Sridhar Iyer Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering & Inter-disciplinary Program in Educational Technology,
                           
                           
                            IIT Bombay Sridhar Iyer is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science & Engg, and the Head of the Interdisciplinary Programme on Educational Technology, at IIT Bombay. He is also the Head of the Centre for Distance Engineering Education and the Principal Investigator of the National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning at IIT Bombay. ... more His current research interests are in the field of Educational Technology. This includes: Technology enhanced learning environments for thinking skills, Pedagogies for effective use of educational technologies, Development of ICT tools for educational applications, and Computer Science education research. Some development projects that that he has conceptualized and led are: Project OSCAR, a repository of ~450 Interactive Visualizations for topics at the school and higher education levels, and Computer Masti, a series of books for teaching-learning of Computers in schools. These products have seen more than 100K downloads from 120 countries. In 2016, Computer Masti was acquired by a company and the books are now being used in ~1000 schools in India. Prior to Educational Technology, he has worked in wireless networking protocols and mobile applications. Sridhar Iyer received his BTech, MTech and PhD from the Dept of Computer Science & Engg at IIT Bombay. less Visit website Dr. Prajish Prasad Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Computer Science,
                           
                           
                            FLAME University Prajish Prasad is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computing and Data Sciences at FLAME University, Pune.. He completed his PhD from the Interdisciplinary Programme in Educational Technology at IIT Bombay. His bachelor and master degrees are in Computer Science. He is a computing education researcher, and specializes in designing technology-enhanced learning environments for topics in computer science. Prior to joining his PhD, he worked as a software developer in an EdTech startup, and as an engineering instructor, teaching courses for computer science undergraduates. 

BSCS3002 Degree Level Course Software Testing To prepare the students to understand the phases of testing based on requirements for a project, to apply the concepts taught in the course to formulate test requirements precisely, to design and execute test cases as a part of a standard software development IDE, and to apply specially designed test case design techniques for specific application domains. by Meenakshi D'Souza Course ID: BSCS3002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Core Option I Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Software Testing: Motivation, Software Development Life Cycle, Terminologies and Processes, Software Test Automation: JUnit as an example WEEK 2 Basics of Graphs, Fundamental Graph Algorithms, Elementary Graph Algorithms, Structural Graph Coverage Criteria, Algorithms: Structural Graph Coverage Criteria WEEK 3 Graph Coverage Criteria: Applied to Test Code, Data Flow in Graphs,, Data Flow Testing Example, Unit Testing Based on Graphs: Summary WEEK 4 Software Design and Integration Testing, Design Integration Testing and Graph Coverage, Specification Testing and Graph Coverage, Graph Coverage and Finite State Machines (FSM), Testing Source Code: Classical Coverage Criteria WEEK 5 Logic: Basics needed for Software Testing, Coverage Criteria, Logic Coverage Criteria: Making clauses determine predicate, Applied to test code WEEK 6 Logic: Coverage Example, Coverage Specification, Coverage FSM, Coverage Summary, SMT - Solvers WEEK 7 Symbolic Testing, Concolic Execution, Example and Summary Symbolic Execution WEEK 8 Requirements, Functional Testing,  ISP, ISP Example WEEK 9 Regular Expense CFGs, Mutation Testing, Mutation Operators Source Code, Mutation Testing Vs Other Criteria, Mutation Testing For Integration And Tools WEEK 10 Basic Object Oriented (OO) Integration Concepts, Mutation Operators OO Integration, Mutation Operators OO Integration, OO Faults, Coupling Criteria WEEK 11 Web Apps Intro, Client Side Testing, Server Side Testing WEEK 12 Regression Testing, Software Quality Metrics, Non Functional Testing, TDD,Course Summary + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Paul Ammann and Jeff Offutt, Introduction to Software Testing, Cambridge University Press, 2008. Glenford J. Myers, The Art of Software Testing, Second edition, 2008. Paul C. Jorgensen, Software Testing: A Craftsman’s Approach, Fourth edition, CRC Press, 2014. Lisa Crispin and Janet Gregory, Agile Testing: A Practical Guide for
Testers and Agile Teams, Addison-Wesley, 2009. Appropriate research papers on testing techniques, information regarding testing tools, as applicable. About the Instructors Meenakshi D'Souza Associate Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIIT Bangalore Meenakshi D'Souza is an Associate Professor at IIIT-Bangalore and has been with the institute for the past ten years. Prior to joining IIIT-Bangalore, Meenakshi worked for Honeywell Technology Solutions, Bangalore. Meenakshi is a council member of ACM India and an Associate Editor of Sadhana, a journal of Indian Academy of Sciences. ... more Her research interests are in the areas of software testing and formal verification of embedded software. Meenakshi teaches courses on Theory of Computation, Software Testing (in NPTEL too), Design and Analysis of Algorithms and Graph Theory. Meenakshi is also interested in gender diversity and accessibility in STEM and IT. l
BSCS3003 Degree Level Course AI: Search Methods for Problem Solving We look at how an intelligent agent solves new problems. Starting with blind search we quickly move on to heuristic search, and look at several variations designed to combat the combinatorial explosion that search has to face. We study how board games like Chess and Go are played; how search facilitates logical reasoning; and approaches to domain independent planning of actions to achieve a goal. We end with looking at an alternative formulation that combines search and reasoning as constraint processing. by Deepak Khemani Course ID: BSCS3003 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Core Option II Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Get a historical and philosophical perspective on artificial intelligence. The ability to formulate problems in a general problem solving framework. Knowledge of domain independent search based problem solving algorithms. Knowledge of stochastic, local, and population based search algorithms. The foundations of problem decomposition and rule based methods. Ability to implement game playing algorithms. An understanding of the relation between search methods and other with other
formulations including planning, constraints and logical reasoning. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction and philosophy. The Turing Test. The Winograd Schema Challenge. Placing search in the landscape of AI. WEEK 2 Search spaces. Examples. State space search. Depth First, Breadth First, Iterative Deepening. Analysis. WEEK 3 Heuristic search. Heuristic functions. Solution space search. Escaping local optima. Stochastic local search. WEEK 4 Population based methods. Genetic Algorithms, emergent systems, Ant Colony Optimization. WEEK 5 Finding optimal paths. Algorithm A*. Admissibility of A*. WEEK 6 The monotone condition. Space saving versions of A*. Sequence alignment. WEEK 7 Game playing. Board games. Algorithms Minimax, Alpha-Beta, and SSS*. WEEK 8 Automated domain independent planning. Goal Stack Planning, Partial Order Planning. WEEK 9 Problem decomposition with goal trees. Algorithm AO*. WEEK 10 Pattern directed inference systems. Forward chaining inference engine. The Rete algorithm. WEEK 11 Constraint processing. Algorithm Backtracking. Arc consistency. Combining search and reasoning. Waltz algorithm. Model based diagnosis. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Deepak Khemani. A First Course in Artificial Intelligence, McGraw Hill Education (India),
2013. (Chapters 1 – 8, some parts from Chapters 9 and 10)) Reference John Haugeland, Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea, A Bradford Book, The MIT Press,
1985. Pamela McCorduck, Machines Who Think: A Personal Inquiry into the History and
Prospects of Artificial Intelligence, A K Peters/CRC Press; 2nd  edition, 2004. Eugene Charniak and Drew McDermott, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, Addison-
Wesley Publ., 1985. Zbigniew Michalewicz and David B. Fogel. How to Solve It: Modern Heuristics. Springer; 2nd
edition, 2004. Judea Pearl. Heuristics: Intelligent Search Strategies for Computer Problem Solving, 
Addison-Wesley, 1984. Elaine Rich and Kevin Knight. Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, 1991. Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,
Prentice Hall, 2009. Patrick Henry Winston. Artificial Intelligence, Addison-Wesley, 1992. Stefan Edelkamp and Stefan Schroedl. Heuristic Search: Theory and Applications,  Morgan
Kaufmann,  2011. About the Instructors Deepak Khemani Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Deepak Khemani is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Madras, India. He graduated with three degrees from IIT Bombay, including two in Computer Science. His areas of research are broadly in Artificial Intelligence.He is the author of a text book ‘A First Course in Artificial Intelligence’. He has three online courses on Swayam developed as part of the NPTEL program, covering problem-solving using search, knowledge representation and reasoning, and constraint satisfaction. ... more His research focus is in the areas of knowledge, memory, reasoning and planning. He plans to employ these to build articulate systems that can take a problem-solving approach to teaching by a machine, especially in the areas of high school mathematics and science. More recently he has worked in the domain of multi-agent systems where an agent has to reason with what other agents know and believe. He is working towards implementing a contract bridge playing program that reasons like a human expert.The human-level contract bridge playing agent will be required to do epistemic planning while collaborating with a team member and competing against opponents in an environment of incomplete information. less Visit website View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                BSCS3004 Degree Level Course Deep Learning To study the basics of Neural Networks and their various variants such as the Convolutional Neural Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks, to study the different ways in which they can be used to solve problems in various domains such as Computer Vision, Speech and NLP. by Mitesh M.Khapra Course ID: BSCS3004 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Core Option II Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS A brief history of deep learning and its success stories. Perceptrons, Sigmoid neurons  and Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP) with specific emphasis on their representation power and algorithms used for training them (such as Perceptron Learning Algorithm and Backpropagation). Gradient Descent (GD) algorithm and its variants like Momentum based GD,AdaGrad, Adam etc
Principal Component Analysis and its relation to modern Autoencoders. The bias variance tradeoff and regularisation techniques used in DNNs (such as L2 regularisation, noisy data augmentation, dropout, etc). Different activation functions and weight initialization strategies Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) such as AlexNet, ZFNet, VGGNet, InceptionNet and ResNet. Recurrent Neural Network (RNNs) and their variants such as LSTMs and GRUs (in particular, understanding the vanishing/exploding gradient problem and how LSTMs overcome the vanishing gradient problem) Applications of CNN and RNN models for various computer vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP) problems. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 History of Deep Learning, McCulloch Pitts Neuron, Thresholding Logic, Perceptron Learning Algorithm and Convergence WEEK 2 Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs), Representation Power of MLPs, Sigmoid Neurons, Gradient Descent WEEK 3 Feedforward Neural Networks, Representation Power of Feedforward Neural Networks, Backpropagation WEEK 4 Gradient Descent(GD), Momentum Based GD, Nesterov Accelerated GD, Stochastic GD, Adagrad, AdaDelta,RMSProp, Adam,AdaMax,NAdam, learning rate schedulers WEEK 5 Autoencoders and relation to PCA , Regularization in autoencoders, Denoising autoencoders, Sparse autoencoders, Contractive autoencoders WEEK 6 Bias Variance Tradeoff, L2 regularization, Early stopping, Dataset augmentation, Parameter sharing and tying, Injecting noise at input, Ensemble methods, Dropout WEEK 7 Greedy Layer Wise Pre-training, Better activation functions, Better weight initialization methods, Batch Normalization WEEK 8 Learning Vectorial Representations Of Words, Convolutional Neural Networks, LeNet, AlexNet, ZF-Net, VGGNet, GoogLeNet, ResNet WEEK 9 Visualizing Convolutional Neural Networks, Guided Backpropagation, Deep Dream, Deep Art, Fooling Convolutional Neural Networks WEEK 10 Recurrent Neural Networks, Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT), Vanishing and Exploding Gradients, Truncated BPTT WEEK 11 Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs), Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) Cells, Solving the vanishing gradient problem with LSTM WEEK 12 Encoder Decoder Models, Attention Mechanism, Attention over images, Hierarchical Attention, Transformers. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. An MIT
Press book. 2016. Charu C. Aggarwal. Neural Networks and Deep Learning: A Textbook. Springer.
2019. About the Instructors Mitesh M.Khapra Associate Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Mitesh M. Khapra is an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at IIT Madras and is affiliated with the Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and AI. He is also a co-founder of One Fourth Labs, a startup whose mission is to design and deliver affordable hands-on courses on AI and related topics. He is also a co-founder of AI4Bharat, a voluntary community with an aim to provide AI-based solutions to India-specific problems. His research interests span the areas of Deep Learning, Multimodal Multilingual Processing, Natural Language Generation, Dialog systems, Question Answering and Indic Language Processing. Prior to IIT Madras, he was a Researcher at IBM Research India for four and a half years, where he worked on several interesting problems in the areas of Statistical Machine Translation, Cross Language Learning, Multimodal Learning, Argument Mining and Deep Learning. Prior to IBM, he completed his PhD and M.Tech from IIT Bombay in Jan 2012 and July 2008 respectively.During his PhD he was a recipient of the IBM PhD Fellowship (2011) and the Microsoft Rising Star Award (2011). He is also a recipient of the Google Faculty Research Award (2018), the IITM Young Faculty Recognition Award (2019) and the Prof. B. Yegnanarayana Award for Excellence in Research and Teaching (2020). less View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
     
BSCS3005 Degree Level Course Programming in C This course is intended as a practical introduction to C programming. The focus is on gaining experience with writing and debugging programs. 
 
At the end of this course, a student should be able to:
-write, compile, and run programs in C
-use debugging tools to find and correct errors in programs
-use various constructs in C and the standard library of C to implement basic data structures and algorithms
-understand the need for an OS and how programs interact with the system by Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: BSCS3005 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 8 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Write, compile, and run programs in C in a Linux environment; debugging tools WEEK 2 Variables, built-in datatypes, operators; Control flow - conditionals, loops WEEK 3 Modularity and functions; variable scope WEEK 4 Input/Output; Files WEEK 5 Pointers, memory, arrays, strings WEEK 6 Multi-dimensional arrays, dynamic memory allocation; issues - memory leaks, management WEEK 7 Standard library and common extensions (math, time, etc.) WEEK 8 Implementation concepts: compilation and execution process; heap/stack; runtime and OS interface + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: “The C programming language,” Kernighan and Ritchie Practical C Programming, S. Oualline, O’Reilly Publications Online sources and language reference About the Instructors Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2003 -
                                    Modern Application Development I and BSCS2006 -
                                    Modern Application Development II
 
BSCS3006 Degree Level Course Introduction to Big Data This course will introduce students to practical aspects of analytics at a large scale, i.e. big data. The course will start with a basic introduction to big data and cloud concepts spanning hardware, systems and software, and then delve into the details of algorithm design and execution at large scale. by Rangarajan Vasudevan Course ID: BSCS3006 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS This course will introduce students to practical aspects of analytics at a large scale, i.e. big data. The course will start with a basic introduction to big data and cloud concepts spanning hardware, systems and software, and then delve into the details of algorithm design and execution at large scale. Introduction to Cloud Concepts: Cloud-Native architecture, serverless computing, message queues, PaaS, SaaS, IaaS Introduction to Big Data concepts: divide- and-conquer, parallel algorithms, distributed virtualized storage, distributed resource management, real-time processing. Data Processing Fundamentals: data formats, sources and their semantics, processing patterns for large data (the ETL vs ELT difference), processing + storage options on cloud, lakehouse architecture Technology deep-dive on Open Source as well as Google Cloud echnologies covered: Spark (PySpark, Spark ML, Spark Streaming), SQL (SparkSQL), Kafka, Google Pub/Sub, Google Dataproc, Google Cloud Functions Course structure & Assessments 11 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction: ​Big data concepts & GCP Platform Setup WEEK 2 Cloud concepts​: ​Cloud-Native architecture, serverless computing, message queues, PaaS, SaaS, IaaS WEEK 3 Types of Data​:​ Data formats, sources & their semantics, processing & storage options on Cloud. Use of serverless to get started (e.g. Google Cloud Functions) WEEK 4 Intro to Big Data Engineering​:​ Hadoop and PySpark WEEK 5 ELT​:​ ETL, processing patterns for large data, ETL vs ELT, role of a scheduler WEEK 6 SQL & NoSQL: For most analysis tasks, SQL is sufficient. Tools
like Spark SQL allow that familiarity to translate to big data
solutions. Types of NoSQL, evolution, best-of-fit options. WEEK 7 Streaming​: Overview, Fundamental Concepts, Walkthrough of Google Pub/Sub & Google DataFlow as example technologies WEEK 8 Streaming​: Kafka as another example of message queue technology & Spark Streaming WEEK 9 Big Data ML​:​ DataProc with ML - including Spark ML (Batch processing) WEEK 10 Deep Learning​ with big data on cloud. WEEK 11 Prep week for final project, summarizing key concepts, and also for Q&A and clarifications + Show all weeks About the Instructors Rangarajan Vasudevan Co-Founder & Chief Data Officer
 
,
                           
                           
                           
                            Lentra.ai Rangarajan Vasudevan is the Co-Founder & CDO of Lentra.ai, India’s fastest growing lending cloud. He did “big data” & “data science” before it was fashionable, building data-native applications across industries and geographies over 15+ years. ... more Ranga joined Lentra by way of an acquisition in June 2022 of his company TheDataTeam, creators of Cadenz.ai customer intelligence platform. Prior to founding TheDataTeam, Ranga served as Director, Big Data with Teradata Corporation’s international business unit. Ranga joined Teradata via the acquisition of Aster Data Systems, where he was a founding engineer and co-invented a company-defining, patented, pattern recognition algorithm. He is a recipient of both the Distinguished Engineer (R&D) and Consulting Excellence awards while at Teradata. Ranga has degrees in Computer Science from the University of Michigan and IIT Madras. 

BSCS3007 Degree Level Course Privacy & Security in Online Social Media by Ponnurangam Kumaraguru Course ID: BSCS3007 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS List various privacy and security concerns (spam, phishing, fraud nodes, identity theft) on online social networks Describe different methodologies used for solving security and privacy problems on online social networks Student will be able to collect data from OSM, analyze, and visualize the data within the context of Privacy & Security in Online Social Media Design a project idea to attack one problem discussed in the course or any topic you identify in the online social networks (through Mini-Project)(Optional) Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Topics – Assessments 
Social network analysis 101 – WEEK 2 Collecting data from social media – Collect data, analyze, and report WEEK 3 Text analysis of social media data – Analyze data and report WEEK 4 Cyber crime on social media – Analyze data and report WEEK 5 Cyber crime on social media – Reading paper and report WEEK 6 Fake news on social media – Analyze data and report WEEK 7 Fake news on social media – Reading paper and report WEEK 8 Privacy on social media – Analyze data and report WEEK 9 Privacy on social media – Reading paper and report WEEK 10 Ethics, bias on online social media – Reading paper and report WEEK 11 Computational social science – Reasoning / Comprehension of ideas WEEK 12 Computational social science on online social media – Reading paper and report + Show all weeks About the Instructors Ponnurangam Kumaraguru Professor 
 
,
                           
                            
                                Computer Science 
 
,
                           
                           
                            IIIT Hyderabad Prof. Ponnurangam Kumaraguru ("PK") is a Professor of Computer Science at IIIT-Hyderabad. He is a Visiting Faculty at IIT Kanpur, an Adjunct faculty at IIIT Delhi, and Associated Researcher at Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and AI, IIT Madras. PK was inducted an ACM Distinguished Member in 2021. PK is an ACM India Council Member, and Chair of the Research Facilitation Committee of ACM India. PK is a TEDx and an ACM Distinguished & ACM India Eminent Speaker. PK received his Ph.D. from the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). His Ph.D. thesis work on anti-phishing research at CMU contributed in creating an award-winning startup - Wombat Security Technologies, wombatsecurity.com. Wombat was acquired in March 2018 for USD 225 Million. PK was listed in the World's 2% Scientists by Stanford University in Nov 2020. He has co-authored research papers in the field of Computational Social Science, Privacy and Security in Online Social Media, Cyber Security, Social Computing, Data Science for Social Good, amongst others. PK's research work regularly gets featured on news media, including print, online, and TV within India and across the world. PK started and successfully manages PreCog (precog.iiit.ac.in), a research group at IIIT-Hyderabad. less View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
           BSCS3031 Degree Level Course Computer Systems Design To learn about the internal organisation of the computer. To learn about the architecture of a computer’s CPU. by Ayon Chakraborty Course ID: BSCS3031 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 8 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Course Overview, Building  Blocks of Computer Systems WEEK 2 Foundation of Logical Circuits, Introduction to Boolean Algebra WEEK 3 Canonical Forms (SOP & POS), Universal Gates and Timing Diagrams WEEK 4 N- bit Comparator, Multiplexer, Encoder and Decoder WEEK 5 Adder and PLA, Boolean Logic Simplification, K-maps WEEK 6 Introduction to Circuit verse, 7 Segment LED Display WEEK 7 Introduction to Sequential Circuits WEEK 8 Registers, Counters WEEK 9 Sequential logic design, FSM Design WEEK 10 Instruction Set architecture WEEK 11 ALU Design WEEK 12 CPU Design + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Computer Organization and Design, 4th Ed, D. A. Patterson and J. L. Hennessy W. Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture – Designing for Performance, 9th Edition, Pearson, 2013 About the Instructors Ayon Chakraborty Assistant Professor
,
                           
                            
                                Computer science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prof. Ayon Chakraborty is an Assistant Professor in the Department of CSE at IIT Madras. He received his PhD from SUNY Stony Brook, NY, and had a three-year stint as a researcher at NEC Labs America, Princeton, NJ.  His research interests are in designing IoT-based/mobile systems that interact with and interpret (sense) the physical world, spanning both algorithm design as well as end-to-end system prototyping. BSCS4001 Degree Level Course Data Visualization Design To provide students with the foundations necessary for understanding and extending the current state of the art in data visualization, to gain an understanding of the key techniques and theory used in visualization, including data models, graphical perception and techniques for visual encoding and interaction, to plan for data-based storytelling through charts, maps, and diagrams, to use visualization tools to transform quantitative information to visual representation, and to gain practical experience building and evaluating visualizations. by Venkat Course ID: BSCS4001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Information visualization overview, historical perspective WEEK 2 Vision, perception and cognition principles of information visualization WEEK 3 Data principles and models WEEK 4 Analysis and Insights WEEK 5 Geo-visualization WEEK 6 Map Abstraction WEEK 7 Visual encoding of data WEEK 8 Visualization design WEEK 9 Data Stories WEEK 10 Project presentations, Wrap up and course summary + Show all weeks About the Instructors Venkat Professor,
                           
                            
                                IDC School of Design
 
,
                           
                           
                            IIT Bombay Venkatesh Rajamanickam is a Professor at the IDC School of Design, IIT Bombay. He is a HCI designer, educator and researcher.  His Information Design Lab at IIT Bombay utilizes graphic design, interactive computer graphics, data-processing algorithms and emerging technologies to address challenging problems in data, design and art. His research focuses on data-based and visual understanding of a range of issues from public understanding of science, urban living, politics, education, transportation, to generative art. less View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                 BSCS4002 Degree Level Course Special topics in Machine Learning (Reinforcement Learning) To enable the student to understand the reinforcement learning paradigm, to be able to identify when an RL formulation is appropriate, to understand the basic solution approaches in RL, to implement and evaluate various RL algorithms. by Balaraman Ravindran Course ID: BSCS4002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites: BSCS3004 -  Deep Learning Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Review of ML fundamentals – Classification, Regression. Review of probability theory and optimization concepts. WEEK 2 RL Framework; Supervised learning vs. RL; Explore-Exploit Dilemma; Examples. WEEK 3 MAB: Definition, Uses, Algorithms, Contextual Bandits, Transition to full RL, Intro to full RL problem WEEK 4 Intro to MDPs: Definitions , Returns, Value function, Q-function. WEEK 5 Bellman Equation, DP, Value Iteration, Policy Iteration, Generalized Policy Iteration. WEEK 6 Evaluation and Control: TD learning, SARSA, Q-learning, Monte Carlo, TD Lambda, Eligibility Traces. WEEK 7 Maximization-Bias & Representations: Double Q learning, Tabular learning vs. Parameterized, Q-learning with NNs WEEK 8 Function approximation: Semi-gradient methods, SGD, DQNs, Replay Buffer. WEEK 9 Policy Gradients: Introduction, Motivation, REINFORCE, PG theorem, Introduction to AC methods WEEK 10 Actor-Critic Methods, Baselines, Advantage AC, A3C
 
Advanced Value-Based Methods: Double DQN, Prioritized Experience Replay, Dueling Architectures, Expected SARSA. WEEK 11 Advanced PG/A-C methods: Deterministic PG and DDPG, Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
 
HRL: Introduction to hierarchies, types of optimality, SMDPs, Options, HRL algorithms
POMDPS: Intro, Definitions, Belief states, Solution Methods; History-based methods, LSTMS, Q-MDPs, Direct Solutions, PSR. WEEK 12 Model-Based RL: Introduction, Motivation, Connections to Planning, Types of MBRL, Benefits, RL with a Learnt Model, Dyna-style models, Latent variable models, Examples, Implicit MBRL.
 
Case study on design of RL solution for real-world problems. + Show all weeks About the Instructors Balaraman Ravindran Professor,
                           
                            
                                CSE
,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras B. Ravindran heads the Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science & Artificial Intelligence (RBCDSAI) at IIT Madras. He is the Mindtree Faculty Fellow, TCS Affiliate Faculty and Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at IIT Madras.​ He has held visiting positions at the Indian Institute of Science, University of Technology, Sydney, and Google Research. Currently, his research interests span the areas of geometric deep learning and reinforcement learning.  He is one of the founding executive committee members of the India chapter of ACM SIGKDD. He is currently serving on the editorial boards of Machine Learning Journal, JAIR, ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, PLOS One, and Frontiers in Big Data and AI. He has published more than 100 papers in premier journals and conferences.​  His work with students have won multiple best paper awards, the most recent being ​the best​ application paper​ at ​PAKDD 202​1​. His video lectures on NPTEL are widely viewed and have received accolades for their depth and delivery. ​He received his PhD from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst and his Master’s degree from the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.​ He is a senior member of the Association for Advancement of AI (AAAI) and an ACM Distinguished Member. 

BSCS4004 Degree Level Course Sequential Decision Making At the end of the course, students will be able to understand the differences between the various sequential decision making problems based on the type of feedback involved, recognize practical ML problems as sequential decision making problems whenever they are, learn about optimal algorithms for several sequential decision making settings, and apply the algorithms studied in the course to various practical sequential decision making scenarios. by Arun Rajkumar Course ID: BSCS4004 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to Online Learning, Halving algorithm WEEK 2 Online Machine Learning; Perceptron and Winnow WEEK 3 Intro to Regret; Online learning with expert advice - Hedge algorithm WEEK 4 Online linear optimization WEEK 5 Online convex optimization; Online learning summary WEEK 6 Introduction to Multi armed Bandits - EXP3 WEEK 7 Contextual MAB - EXP4 WEEK 8 Stochastic MAB, Epsilon Greedy, Explore then commit WEEK 9 Stochastic MAB, UCB, Thompson Sampling WEEK 10 Stochastic MAB - Linear Bandits - LinUCB algorithm; MAB summary WEEK 11 Introduction to Reinforcement Learning - Markov Decision Process WEEK 12 Q-learning + Show all weeks About the Instructors Arun Rajkumar Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I am currently an Assistant Professor at the Computer Science and Engineering department of IIT Madras. Prior to joining IIT Madras, I was a research scientist at the Xerox Research Center (now Conduent Labs), Bangalore for three years. I earned my Ph.D from the Indian Institute of Science where I worked on 'Ranking from Pairwise Comparisons'. My research interests are in the areas of Machine learning, statistical learning theory with applications to education and healthcare. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS2004 -
                                    Machine Learning Foundations and BSCS2007 -
                                    Machine Learning Techniques View all Degree Level courses Contact 

BSCS4021 Degree Level Course Advanced Algorithms To introduce advanced ideas in design of algorithms; To study the performance guarantees of algorithms; To introduce methods for coping with NP-hard problems. by Neeldhara Misra Course ID: BSCS4021 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Greedy Algorithms: Storing Files on Tape; Scheduling Classes; Stable Matchings WEEK 2 Matroids: A Generic Optimization Problem, Motivating the Definition, Examples of Matroids, Scheduling with Deadlines WEEK 3 Dynamic Programming: Longest Increasing Subsequence, Edit Distance, Subset Sum, Optimal BSTs WEEK 4 Maximum Flows: Flows, Cuts, Maxflow-Mincut, Augmenting Paths, Bipartite Matchings, Other Settings WEEK 5 Applications of Flows: Exam Scheduling, Baseball Elimination, Project Selection WEEK 6 NP-hardness: P, NP, NP-hardness, NP-completeness, Reductions and SAT, 3SAT, Maximum Independent Set, Graph Coloring, Subset Sum WEEK 7 Approximation Algorithms: Introduction to Approximation Frameworks, Vertex Cover via Maximal Matchings, Vertex Cover via LP rounding, TSP, Set Cover WEEK 8 Randomized Algorithms – Monte Carlo v. Las Vegas, Min-Cut Algorithm, MAX SAT via the Probabilistic Methods, 2SAT via Markov Chains, Primality Testing WEEK 9 Exact Algorithms – Branch and Bound, An Inclusion-Exclusion approach to Hamiltonian Path, Dynamic Programming for TSP, Local Search WEEK 10 Parameterized Algorithms – Closest String, Iterative Compression for FVS, Randomized Algorithm for k-Path, DP over subsets - Set Cover WEEK 11 Kernelization – Vertex Cover, Matrix Rigidity, Feedback Arc Set on Tournaments, Max Sat, Edge Clique Cover WEEK 12 Practical Approaches to Coping with Hardness – SAT Solvers, SAT reductions, LP solvers, LP reductions + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, and Stein. Introduction to Algorithms. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001. David P. Williamson and David B. Shmoys, The Design of Approximation Algorithms About the Instructors Neeldhara Misra Faculty,
                           
                            
                                CSE,
                           
                           
                            IIT Gandhinagar Neeldhara Misra is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar. Her primary research interest involves the design and analysis of efficient algorithms for “hard” problems in general, and parameterized algorithms in particular. The problems considered are typically concerned with combinatorial optimization, frequently in the context of graph theory, social choice, games, geometry, and constraint satisfaction. 

BSCS5001 Degree Level Course Large Language Models Understanding the Transformer architecture
Understanding the concept of pretraining and fine-tuning language models
Compare and contrast different types of tokenizers like BPE, wordpiece, sentencepiece
Understanding different LLMs architectures: encoder-decoder, encoder-only, decoder-only
Exploring common datasets like C4,mc4,Pile, Stack and so on
Addressing the challenges of applying vanilla attention mechanisms for long range context windows.
Apply different types of fine-tuning techniques to fine-tune large language models by Mitesh M.Khapra Course ID: BSCS5001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Transformers: Introduction to transformers - Self-attention - cross- attention-Masked attention-Positional encoding WEEK 2 A deep dive into number of parameters, computational complexity and FLOPs- Introduction to language modeling WEEK 3 Causal Language Modeling: What is a language model?- Generative Pretrained Transformers (GPT) - Training and inference WEEK 4 Masked Language Modeling : Bidirectional Encoder Representations of Transformers (BERT) - Fine-tuning - A deep dive into tokenization: BPE, SentencePiece, wordpiece WEEK 5 Bigger Picture: T5, A deep dive into text-to-text (genesis of prompting), taxonomy of models, road ahead WEEK 6 Data: Datasets, Pipelines, effectiveness of clean data, Architecture: Types of attention, positional encoding (PE) techniques, scaling techniques WEEK 7 Training: Revisiting optimizers, LION vs Adam, Loss functions, Learning schedules, Gradient Clipping, typical failures during training WEEK 8 Fine Tuning: Prompt Tuning,Multi-task Fine-tuning,Parametric Efficient
Fine-Tuning, Instruction fine-tuning datasets WEEK 9 Benchmarks: MMLU, BigBench, HELM,OpenLLM, Evaluation
Frameworks WEEK 10 Training Large Models: Mixed precision training,Activation checkpointing, 3D parallelism, ZERO, Bloom as a case study WEEK 11 Scaling Laws: Chinchilla,Gopher, Palm v2 WEEK 12 Recent advances + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Research papers, articles About the Instructors Mitesh M.Khapra Associate Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Mitesh M. Khapra is an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at IIT Madras and is affiliated with the Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and AI. He is also a co-founder of One Fourth Labs, a startup whose mission is to design and deliver affordable hands-on courses on AI and related topics. He is also a co-founder of AI4Bharat, a voluntary community with an aim to provide AI-based solutions to India-specific problems. His research interests span the areas of Deep Learning, Multimodal Multilingual Processing, Natural Language Generation, Dialog systems, Question Answering and Indic Language Processing. Prior to IIT Madras, he was a Researcher at IBM Research India for four and a half years, where he worked on several interesting problems in the areas of Statistical Machine Translation, Cross Language Learning, Multimodal Learning, Argument Mining and Deep Learning. Prior to IBM, he completed his PhD and M.Tech from IIT Bombay in Jan 2012 and July 2008 respectively.During his PhD he was a recipient of the IBM PhD Fellowship (2011) and the Microsoft Rising Star Award (2011). He is also a recipient of the Google Faculty Research Award (2018), the IITM Young Faculty Recognition Award (2019) and the Prof. B. Yegnanarayana Award for Excellence in Research and Teaching (2020). less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS3004 -
                              BSCS5002 Degree Level Course Introduction to Natural Language Processing (i-NLP) Natural language (NL) refers to the language spoken/written by humans. NL is the primary mode
of communication for humans. With the growth of the world wide web, data in the form of text
has grown exponentially. It calls for the development of algorithms and techniques for
processing natural language for the automation and development of intelligent machines: Natural
Language Processing (NLP).
 
On the completing the course, the participant will learn the following:
1. Why is processing language computationally hard and why specialized techniques need
to be developed to process texts?
2. Knowledge and in-depth understanding of linguistics techniques and classical (statistical)
approaches (pre-deep learning era) to NLP and their limitations.
3. Knowledge and in-depth understanding of deep learning approaches (RNN and CNN) to
NLP.
4. Knowledge and in-depth understanding of Attention Mechanism, Transformers and Large
Language Models (LLMs)
5. Ability to read and understand latest NLP-related research papers.
6. Ability to identify applicable NLP technique to solve a real-world problem involving text
processing.
7. Ability to implement NLP models and algorithms for problems related to text processing.
8. Ability to develop applications based on textual generative models (LLMs - Large
Language Models) by Parameswari Krishnamurthy , Rahul Mishra Course ID: BSCS5002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to Natural Language (NL) Why is it hard to process a natural language? Levels of Language Processing, Linguistic Fundamentals for NLP WEEK 2 Text Processing and Preprocessing: Tokenization, Normalization, Stop word removal, Stemming, lemmatization, Morphological Analysis & Finite State Transducers, Part-of-speech tagging and Named entities WEEK 3 Classical Sequence Models: HMM and CRF WEEK 4 Syntax and Parsing: Constituency parsing, Dependency parsing, Parsing algorithms WEEK 5 Meaning Representation: Distributional Semantics, Logical Semantics, Semantic Role Labelling WEEK 6 -Language Models: n-gram and Word2Vec, GloVe 
-Discourse Processing: Anaphora and Coreference Resolution and Discourse Connectives. Machine Translation WEEK 7 Naïve Bayes Classifier Expectation Maximization Algorithm Logistic Regression Maximum Entropy Models WEEK 8 Recurrent neural networks, LSTMs/GRUs, Neural Sequence Models, Contextualized Word Embeddings: TagLM, ELMO, ULMFIT, etc., Attention Mechanism (Code demo: LSTM/GRU) WEEK 9 Transformers, Self-attention Mechanism, Sub-word tokenization, Positional encoding, Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs): BERT, GPT, etc. Fine-tuning and transfer learning (Code demo: Transformers) WEEK 10 Natural Language Generation, Decoding schemes: greedy, Random
sampling, Top-k, Top-p, Speculative sampling, etc., Retrieval
Augmented generation (RAG) WEEK 11 Large Language Models (LLMs) Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning:
Prefix-coding, LORA, QLORA, etc. Emergent Behavior: In-context
learning, Instruction Fine Tuning, RLHF, DPO (Code demo: LLMs with
Hugging face) WEEK 12 NLP applications: QnA, Summarization, NLI, Fact-checking, etc.
Model Explainability: Attention maps, Attention-flow/rollout,
Integrated gradients, etc. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Speech and Language Processing, Daniel Jurafsky, James H.Martin Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing, CH Manning, H Schuetze Introduction to Natural Language Processing, Jacob Eisenstein Natural Language Understanding, James Allen Deep Dive into Deep Learning, Aston Zhang, Zack C. Lipton, Mu Li, Alexander J. Smola Neural Network Methods for Natural Language Processing, Yaov Goldeberg About the Instructors Parameswari Krishnamurthy Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                 Language Technologies Research Center (LTRC),
                           
                           
                            IIIT Hyderabad Parameswari Krishnamurthy is as an Assistant Professor at the Language Technologies Research Centre, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad. Her doctoral research at the University of Hyderabad delved into Computational Linguistics, with a focus on Telugu-Tamil Machine Translation, emphasizing divergence. Prior to her current position, she held the role of Assistant Professor at the University of Hyderabad. Krishnamurthy's expertise lies in Computational Linguistics and Machine Translation, spanning areas such as Morphological Analysis & Generation, Parsing, Linguistic Divergence, Contrastive Grammar, and Corpus Linguistics. She actively participates in numerous Natural Language Processing projects, particularly those concerning Indian languages and Dravidian languages, aiming to advance core technology tools and NLP applications. less Rahul Mishra Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                 Language Technologies Research Center (LTRC), Computer Science,
                           
                           
                            IIIT Hyderabad Rahul Mishra is an Assistant Professor at IIIT Hyderabad's Language Technology Research Centre (LTRC), where his research focuses on Controllable Text Summarization, Misinformation Detection, Model Explainability, Graph Representation Learning, and Natural Language Generation. Previously, he served as a senior postdoctoral researcher at the University of Geneva, Switzerland, specializing in biomedical NLP. Prior to that, as a Senior Staff Engineer/Researcher, he contributed to research projects at Samsung Research Lab in Bangalore, optimizing and benchmarking large language models on process in memory (PIM) enabled GPUs. He holds a PhD from the University of Stavanger, Norway and an M.Tech from IIIT Delhi. During his doctoral studies, he also worked as a visiting researcher at the Computer Science Department of ETH, Zurich, Switzerland and University of Hannover, Germany. Before pursuing his PhD, he worked as an NLP data scientist in automatic vehicle diagnostic department at KPIT Technologies, Pune, focusing on automatic fact extraction from car service manuals. Prior to that, he also held roles as a consultant researcher at Tata Research Development and Design Centre (TRDDC) and a research intern at IBM Research Bangalore. 
 
BSCS5003 Degree Level Course Deep Learning for Computer Vision -Knowledge of basics of image processing and computer vision
-Knowledge of building blocks of deep learning including feedforward networks, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks and transformers
-Knowledge of generative AI models in computer vision
-Knowledge of recent trends including explainability/zero-shot learning, few-shot learning, self-supervised learning, etc
-Hands-on experience on implementation of basic image processing tasks
-Hands-on experience on implementation of deep learning models for computer vision tasks
-Hands-on experience on implementation of advanced computer vision tasks such as explainability, self-supervised learning, etc by Vineeth N B Course ID: BSCS5003 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction and Overview:
Course Overview and Motivation; Introduction to Image Formation, Capture and
Representation; Linear Filtering, Correlation, Convolution WEEK 2 Visual Features and Representations:
Edge, Blobs, Corner Detection; Scale Space and Scale Selection; SIFT, SURF; HoG,LBP, etc. WEEK 3 Visual Matching:
Bag-of-words, VLAD; RANSAC, Hough transform; Pyramid Matching; Optical Flow WEEK 4 Deep Learning Review:
Review of Deep Learning, Multi-layer Perceptrons, Backpropagation WEEK 5 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs):
Introduction to CNNs; Evolution of CNN Architectures: AlexNet, ZFNet, VGG,
InceptionNets, ResNets, DenseNets WEEK 6 Visualization and Understanding CNNs:
Visualization of Kernels; Backprop-to-image/Deconvolution Methods; Deep Dream,
Hallucination, Neural Style Transfer; CAM, Grad-CAM, Grad-CAM++; Recent Methods
(IG, Segment-IG, SmoothGrad) WEEK 7 CNNs for Recognition, Verification, Detection, Segmentation:
CNNs for Recognition and Verification (Siamese Networks, Triplet Loss, Contrastive
Loss, Ranking Loss); CNNs for Detection: Background of Object Detection, R-CNN, Fast
R-CNN, Faster R-CNN, YOLO, SSD, RetinaNet; CNNs for Segmentation: FCN, SegNet, U-Net, Mask-RCNN WEEK 8 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs):
Review of RNNs; CNN + RNN Models for Video Understanding: Spatio-temporal
Models, Action/Activity Recognition WEEK 9 Attention Models:
Introduction to Attention Models in Vision; Vision and Language: Image Captioning,
Visual QA, Visual Dialog; Spatial Transformers; Transformer Networks WEEK 10 Deep Generative Models:
Review of (Popular) Deep Generative Models: GANs, VAEs; Other Generative Models:
PixelRNNs, NADE, Normalizing Flows, etc WEEK 11 Variants and Applications of Generative Models in Vision:
Applications: Image Editing, Inpainting, Superresolution, 3D Object Generation, Security;
Variants: CycleGANs, Progressive GANs, StackGANs, Pix2Pix, etc WEEK 12 Recent Trends:
Zero-shot, One-shot, Few-shot Learning; Self-supervised Learning; Reinforcement
Learning in Vision; Other Recent Topics and Applications + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Deep Learning, 2016 Michael Nielsen, Neural Networks and Deep Learning, 2016 Yoshua Bengio, Learning Deep Architectures for AI, 2009 Richard Szeliski, Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, 2010. Simon Prince, Computer Vision: Models, Learning, and Inference, 2012. David Forsyth, Jean Ponce, Computer Vision: A Modern Approach, 2002. About the Instructors Vineeth N B Professor,
                           
                            
                                Computer science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                          BSEE4001 Degree Level Course Speech Technology by Prof. S. Umesh , Hema A Murthy Course ID: BSEE4001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS To understand the concepts of speech and speech technologies, and to apply them to real-world scenarios To gain hands-on experience of the relevant toolkits used for speech processing Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Review of Signals and Systems, Continuous time signals and transforms
Discrete time signals, Discrete Fourier transform, Autocorrelation and Cross-Correlation WEEK 2 Acoustic Feature Analysis of Speech Signals I, II
Gaussian mixture models (GMM), universal background model (UBM-GMM), singular value decomposition (SVD) WEEK 3 Hidden Markov model (HMM), Examples of HMM based approach for ASR, TTS, speaker diarization
Information bottleneck (IB) based clustering for diarization WEEK 4 Introduction and History of ASR and TTS
Components of ASR: Acoustic Modelling, Punctuation Model (Lexicon) and language modelling (N-Gram Language models) WEEK 5 HMMs for Acoustic Modelling - Monophone, Triphone
Speech Synthesis: unit selection, statistical parametric synthesis (HTS) WEEK 6 Neural networks for building speech technologies
NN for Acoustic Modelling - Hybrid modelling- Hybrid-NN: DNN,CNN,TDNN WEEK 7 End-to-End Approaches I:
CTC, Encoder-decoder Architecture E2E with RNN WEEK 8 Applications to ASR and TTS
End-to-End Approaches II WEEK 9 Encoder-decoder Architecture E2E with transformers for ASR and TTS
Interesting Problems WEEK 10 Speaker recognition/verification: with ivector, xvector
Speaker diarization: using x-vector WEEK 11 Speaker adaptation:  (revisit i, x vectors) and introduce s-vectors.        
Code Switched Speech recognition; Speech Translation WEEK 12 Singing voice synthesis; voice conversion; generic voice synthesis + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: L R Rabiner and R W Schafer, "Theory and Application of Digital Speech
Processing", PH, Pearson, 2011. L R Rabiner, B-H Juang and B Yegnanarayana, "Fundamentals of Speech
Recognition", Pearson, 2009 (Indian subcontinent adaptation). Xuedong Huang, Alex Acero, Hsiao-wuen Hon, "Spoken Language Processing: A
guide to Theory, Algorithm, and System Development", Prentice Hall PTR, 2001. References: Thomas Quatieri, "Discrete-time Speech Processing: Principles and Practice", PH,
2001. Rabiner and Schafer, "Digital Processing of Speech Signals", Pearson Education,
1993. Recent research papers About the Instructors Prof. S. Umesh Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Electrical Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras S. Umesh is a  Professor of Electrical Engineering at IIT-Madras. He completed his PhD from the University of Rhode Island,USA and his PostDoctoral Fellowship from the City University of New York. He has also been a visiting researcher at AT&T Research Laboratories, USA; at Machine Intelligence Laboratory Cambridge University Engineering Department, UK and the Department of Computer Science, RWTH-Aachen, Germany. ... more He is a recipient of the AICTE Career Award for Young Teachers in 1997 and the Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellowship in 2004.  During his stint at Cambridge University in 2004, he was part of the U.S. DARPA's Effective, Affordable Reusable Speech-to-text (EARS) programme. Similarly in 2005 he was part of the RWTH-Aachen's TC-STAR project for transcription of speech from European Parliament's Plenary Sessions. Between 2010-2016, he led a multi-institution consortium to develop ASR systems in Indian languages in the agriculture domain which was funded by MeiTY. He is currently leading the ASR efforts for the Natural Language Translation Mission managed by the Office of Principal Scientific Adviser of Govt. of India. less Visit website Hema A Murthy Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Faculty at the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras. less Visit website View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSGN3001.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSGN3001 Degree Level Course Strategies for Professional Growth To enable the student to use the creative process to identify and solve problems in an effective way, to use structured creative thinking tools to investigate a particular matter from a variety of perspectives with clarity, to communicate and share thoughts/information accurately and effectively to understand each other, to become a team player, to value other cultures, to overcome obstacles she/he may face when performing a task, to work with hands to become better at engaging and enhancing their thought process, to get pertinent information crucial for learning about something or for communicating, to understand how decisions at the individual level or at the business level affect optimal utilisation of resources, to use conflict resolution tools to effectively resolve conflicts, to perceive emotions of themselves and of others and manage for a better outcome under various circumstances. by Sivakumar M S , Lt Col Jayakumar , Prasanna G , Shiva Subramaniam , Kartic Vaidyanathan , Senthil A V , Prathap Haridoss Course ID: BSGN3001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Mandatory Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Teamwork and Getting Along WEEK 2 Communication and Listening Skills WEEK 3 Cultivating a Growth Mindset WEEK 4 Leadership Lessons WEEK 5 Emotional Intelligence and Conflict Management WEEK 6 Systems Thinking WEEK 7 Engineering Sense WEEK 8 Creativity and Thinking Skills WEEK 9 Cross-cultural Understanding and Personal Grooming WEEK 10 Fiscal and Economic Sense WEEK 11 Presentation Skills WEEK 12 Personal and Professional Development + Show all weeks About the Instructors Sivakumar M S Professor 
 
,
                           
                            
                                Department of Applied Mechanics,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Sivakumar M Srinivasan, fondly called Anbudan Siva,  is a Professor and Head of the Department of Applied Mechanics at IIT Madras. He holds a B.Tech (1985) and an M.S. (1987) both from IIT Madras and a PhD (1993) from the Louisiana State University for his thesis in the area of plasticity. He has been with IIT Madras as a faculty since 1994. He also served as Dean (Students) and Advisor, Guidance and Counseling.  He has been on a mission to nurture holistic leaders of tomorrow who combine competence, cooperation and empathy as their strengths.  He has brought in several initiatives at IIT Madras such as MITR (Mentoring for Inner TRansformation), Wellness Center; LTAP (Leisure Time Activities Program); popular curricular courses such as Happiness, habits and success, Discovering Creativity, Biomimicry, Fostering Enriching Relationships and Life skills; National Cultural Appreciation (similar to NSS and NCC); ECDC: Early Career Development Center; Coach in the Court concept; to name a few. less Lt Col Jayakumar Consultant and Guest Faculty,
                           
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Lt Col Jayakumar is a veteran of the Indian Army.  He was an Instructor in Gunnery and a Certified Personality Assessment Professional from the Defence Institute of Psychological Research.  He was a part of the Selection Committee of Services Selection Board from 1999 to 2003 as Technical Officer/ Psychologist in Bhopal. He took over the duties of Placement and Public Relations at IIT Madras in 2006 and superannuated in 2018.  Since then, he is into coaching students in facing interviews, personality development, corporate training on leadership and teaching students of IIT Madras as a guest faculty. less Prasanna G Guest Faculty,
                           
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prasanna is a guest faculty in IIT Madras. She has been coaching professionals, women, parents, and students for 12+ years. She helps people discover what they truly want in life, eliminate the barriers and blocks getting in their way, re-claim their true selves and live a fuller and deeper life. She graduated as a Core Energy & Energy Leadership Coach from the Institute of Professional Empowerment Coaching (iPEC), USA. Prior to this, she worked with TCS and Wipro for 12 years. She worked in various roles as a Programmer/ Developer, Technical Architect & Business Analyst, Project Manager, and Solution Design Consultant; for different verticals. She graduated with a B.Tech in Electronics & Communications from IIT Madras in 1995. less Shiva Subramaniam Guest Faculty,
                           
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Shiva Subramaniam is a life skills coach, consultant, and innovation evangelist. In his career spanning over three decades, he has worked with a multitude of organizations, teams, and individuals, helping them with new ways of thinking, exploring connections, expanding their vision and realizing their potential. He is a lawyer by training and was practising at the High Court in Chennai and also worked with TCS. He is now a guest faculty at IIT Madras and is the co-founder of the Biomimicry Compass. less Kartic Vaidyanathan Guest Faculty,
                           
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Kartic Vaidyanathan is the founder of Let’s Play To Learn, an initiative that enables joyful learning through the power of play for corporates and educational institutions.  The play-based solution offerings span industry segments, domains, and multiple levels of the organisation.  He also conducts workshops for corporates and FDPs for educational institutions on tools and techniques for gamified interactive learning. He has been teaching multiple courses at IIT Madras for the last 3 years in the capacity of guest faculty. Prior to this, he had a 21-year corporate stint in IT Majors (Infosys/ Cognizant). He has authored the book “Power of Play in Audience Engagement.” He graduated from IIT Madras in 1996 and completed his Exec MBA in IIM Bangalore in 2009. less Senthil A V Certified Financial Planner
, Senthil A V started his career in a consulting firm and then moved to TCS, where he was responsible for implementing Activity Based Costing. He did his M. S. from BITS Pilani and Ph. D. in Commerce (Wealth Management) from the University of Madras. Senthil is a seasoned Wealth & IT professional specialising in mentoring, wealth management, solution shaping, extensive deal structuring & working with cross-functional teams. He was heading wealth and mentoring verticals at Metis Family Office from March 2017 to June 2019. less Prathap Haridoss Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prathap Haridoss is currently the Dean (Academic Courses) and a Professor in the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at IIT Madras. He did his B.Tech in Metallurgical Engineering from IIT Madras and got his Ph. D. from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. He worked as a Senior Scientist in Plug Power New York, before joining IIT Madras as a Faculty. His research interests include Fuel Cell and Carbon Nanomaterials. Prathap Haridoss was also one of the coordinators of NPTEL (National Program on Technology Enhanced Learning) and the IIT Madras B.S. Degree Program. less Visit website View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                 
 BSGN3002 Degree Level Course Financial Forensics An introduction to Finance and Accounting, The life cycle of a financial transaction, Areas where AI/ML is used in the Finance Industry, Importance of Model Explainability in the Regulated World, An introduction to solving real world finance problems – Credit Card Fraud Detection, Identity Fraud Detection, Anti Money Laundering Scenarios by Dr. Arun Kumar G Course ID: BSGN3002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 INTRODUCTION TO ACCOUNTING AND FINANCE: Financial Statements | Uses relevance of financial statements | Decision making in the financial arena | Need for finance and accounting in a business world WEEK 2 FRAUD VULNERABILITIES AND FINANCE: Types of fraud | Why do they occur | Where do they occur | Detecting red flags WEEK 3 FORENSIC ACCOUNTING - 1: Intro to Forensic Accounting | Source of assignments and referrals for a forensic accountant | Role of the forensic accountant as an expert - identify any conflicts WEEK 4 FORENSIC ACCOUNTING - 2: Scope of forensic accounting | Process of forensic accounting - Analysis WEEK 5 BENFORD LAW AND IMPLEMENTATION: Benford Law | Using Benford Law in Excel to detect audit fraud WEEK 6 AGING ANALYSIS, PARETO AND OUTLIERS: Detecting fraud using Aging Analysis in Excel | Creating a Pareto Chart | Outlier identification WEEK 7 FINANCIAL TRANSACTION LIFECYCLE: Transaction Lifecycle | Where is AI/ML used in the present world? WEEK 8 ENTITY RESOLUTION: What is an entity in a transaction? | Entity resolution WEEK 9 ANOMALY DETECTION - 1: Supervised Anomaly Detection WEEK 10 ANOMALY DETECTION - 2: Unsupervised Anomaly Detection WEEK 11 ANOMALY DETECTION - 3: Time Based Anomaly Detection WEEK 12 Model Explainability | Financial Data Visualization using Tableau + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Robert N Anthony, David F Hawkins and Kenneth A Merchant, Accounting: Text and Cases Stephen H Penman, Financial Statement Analysis and Security Valuation, Tata McGraw Hill Company, Third Edition. Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., & Stein, C. (2009). Introduction to algorithms. Mit Press. James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (n.d.). An introduction to statistical learning: With applications in R. About the Instructors Dr. Arun Kumar G Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Management Studies(DOMS),
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prof. G Arun Kumar is a faculty in the Department of Management Studies at IIT Madras. His areas of interest are Finance and Corporate Governance issues. He was actively involved in "Evidence based impact assessment of development" and have worked on field based Impact assessment assignments in the peri-urban or rural setting across the country. Some of these assignments include development of micro enterprises, microfinance, migration & remittances, digital literacy, skill development, women empowerment & women led micro enterprises, etc. 

BSHS1001 Foundational Level Course English I This course aims at achieving fluency and confidence in spoken and written English. This course will use insights from theories of learning and dominant methods of teaching language. by Rajesh Kumar , Karthika Sathyanathan Course ID: BSHS1001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Acquiring wide range of vocabulary and linguistic competence that is required for functional performance; Identifying patterns of basic sentence types and structural accuracy; Building elementary foundations for the knowledge related to conventions and use of language in society, particularly in speaking and listening skills; Developing the basic skills for creative reading and writing with precision. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Sounds and Words (Vowel and Consonant sounds) WEEK 2 Parts of Speech WEEK 3 Sentences (Phrases and Idioms) WEEK 4 Speaking Skills (Spoken English Preliminaries) WEEK 5 Tenses and Agreement in English Sentences WEEK 6 Reading Skills (Skimming, Scanning and Comprehension) WEEK 7 Listening Skills WEEK 8 Aspiration, Word Stress and Syllabification WEEK 9 Speaking Skills (Presentation and Group Discussion) WEEK 10 Grammar (Common Errors in English) and Writing Skills WEEK 11 Writing Skills (Basics of Writing) WEEK 12 Writing Skills (Professional Writing) + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Addition Learning Support for English - 1 (Basic English) DOWNLOAD Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Aarts, Bas (2011). Oxford Modern English Grammar, New York: Oxford University Press Murphy, Raymond (2012). English Grammar in Use, New York: Cambridge University Press. 4th Edition Krishnaswamy, Subashree and K. Srilata eds. (2007). Short Fiction from South India. Delhi: OUP. Dhanavel, S.P. (2010). English and soft skills (V-1). Chennai: Orient Blackswan. References: Oxford English Dictionary Croft, Sebastian (2018). How to Analyze People: The Ultimate Guide to Speed Reading People Through Proven Psychological Techniques, Body Language Analysis and Personality Types and Patterns (Available on Kindle) Malgudi Days: A collection of short-stories (RK Narayan) 365 Jataka Tales (Om Books International) 365 Panchtatra Stories (Adil Mukesh) 365 Tales from Indian Mythology (Om Books International) About the Instructors Rajesh Kumar Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Rajesh Kumar is professor of linguistics in the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai. He obtained his PhD in linguistics from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Prior to joining IIT Madras, he taught at IIT Kanpur, and IIT Patna in India and at the University of Texas at Austin in the USA. He has been a visiting faculty at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai in India. His book on Syntax of Negation and Licensing of Negative Polarity Items was published by Routledge in their prestigious series Outstanding Dissertations in Linguistics in 2006. He is associate editor of the journal Language and Language Teaching. He has been part of the language teaching program at all the institutions he has been affiliated with. The broad goal of his research is to uncover regularities underlying both the form (what language is) and sociolinguistic functions (what language does) of natural languages. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSHS1002 -
                                    English II Karthika Sathyanathan Alumna,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Karthika has an MA in English Studies from IIT Madras. She has worked as a Language & Education Consultant with multiple government departments and non-government organisations. Currently she is working as project officer with IIT Madras. Her areas of interest include ELT, multilingualism, multiculturalism and second language learning. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSHS1002 -
                                    English II 
BSHS1002 Foundational Level Course English II Focus on achieving greater degree of fluency in functional and conversational English to understand subtle and detailed meaning in conversations and texts through short literary pieces and contextualized content. by Rajesh Kumar , Karthika Sathyanathan Course ID: BSHS1002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites: BSHS1001 -  English I What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Integrating the basic skills of language into developing advanced skills of language proficiency to help compose clear and detailed writing on a range of subjects; Learning advanced level of vocabulary and socio-linguistic/ socio-pragmatic competence for advance reading and writing; Building nuanced structure for grammatical accuracy for fluency and creating confidence and appropriateness for expressing view-points clearly; Developing elementary foundations for comprehending and conveying underlying meaning in spoken discourse Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Patterns in Sentences WEEK 2 Patterns in Sentences (Continued) WEEK 3 Patterns in Sentences (Continued) WEEK 4 Listening Skills WEEK 5 Listening Skills (Continued) WEEK 6 Speaking Skills WEEK 7 Speaking Skills (Continued) WEEK 8 Reading Skills WEEK 9 Writing Skills WEEK 10 Writing Skills (Continued) WEEK 11 Social Skills WEEK 12 Social Skills (Continued) + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Addition Learning Support for English - 2 (Basic English) DOWNLOAD About the Instructors Rajesh Kumar Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Rajesh Kumar is professor of linguistics in the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai. He obtained his PhD in linguistics from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Prior to joining IIT Madras, he taught at IIT Kanpur, and IIT Patna in India and at the University of Texas at Austin in the USA. He has been a visiting faculty at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai in India. His book on Syntax of Negation and Licensing of Negative Polarity Items was published by Routledge in their prestigious series Outstanding Dissertations in Linguistics in 2006. He is associate editor of the journal Language and Language Teaching. He has been part of the language teaching program at all the institutions he has been affiliated with. The broad goal of his research is to uncover regularities underlying both the form (what language is) and sociolinguistic functions (what language does) of natural languages. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSHS1001 -
                                    English I Karthika Sathyanathan Alumna,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Karthika has an MA in English Studies from IIT Madras. She has worked as a Language & Education Consultant with multiple government departments and non-government organisations. Currently she is working as project officer with IIT Madras. Her areas of interest include ELT, multilingualism, multiculturalism and second language learning. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSHS1001 -
                                    English I 

BSMA1001 Foundational Level Course Mathematics for Data Science I This course introduces functions (straight lines, polynomials, exponentials and logarithms) and discrete mathematics (basics, graphs) with many examples. The students will be exposed to the idea of using abstract mathematical structures to represent concrete real life situations. by Neelesh Upadhye , Madhavan Mukund Course ID: BSMA1001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Recall the basics of sets, natural numbers, integers, rational numbers, and real numbers. Learn to use the coordinate system, and plot straight lines. Identify the properties and differences between linear, quadratic, polynomial, exponential, and logarithmic functions. Find roots, maxima and minima of polynomials using algorithmic methods. Learn to represent sets and relations between set elements as discrete graphs using nodes and edges. Formulate some common real-life problems on graphs and solve them. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Set Theory - Number system, Sets and their operations, Relations and functions - Relations and their types, Functions and their types WEEK 2 Rectangular coordinate system, Straight Lines - Slope of a line, Parallel and perpendicular lines, Representations of a Line, General equations of a line, Straight-line fit WEEK 3 Quadratic Functions - Quadratic functions, Minima, maxima, vertex, and slope, Quadratic Equations WEEK 4 Algebra of Polynomials - Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, Algorithms, Graphs of Polynomials - X-intercepts, multiplicities, end behavior, and turning points, Graphing & polynomial creation WEEK 5 Functions - Horizontal and vertical line tests, Exponential functions, Composite functions, Inverse functions WEEK 6 Logarithmic Functions - Properties, Graphs, Exponential equations, Logarithmic equations WEEK 7 Sequence and Limits - Function of One variable - • Function of one variable • Graphs and Tangents • Limits for sequences • Limits for function of one variable • Limits and Continuity WEEK 8 Derivatives, Tangents and Critical points - • Differentiability and the derivative • Computing derivatives and L’Hˆopital’s rule • Derivatives, tangents and linear approximation • Critical points: local maxima and minima WEEK 9 Integral of a function of one variable - • Computing areas, Computing areas under a curve, The integral of a function of one variable • Derivatives and integrals for functions of one variable WEEK 10 Graph Theory - Representation of graphs, Breadth-first search, Depth-first search, Applications of BFS and DFS; Directed Acyclic Graphs - Complexity of BFS and DFS, Topological sorting WEEK 11 Longest path, Transitive closure, Matrix multiplication Graph theory Algorithms - Single-source shortest paths, Dijkstra's algorithm, Bellman-Ford algorithm, All-pairs shortest paths, Floyd–Warshall algorithm, Minimum cost spanning trees, Prim's algorithm, Kruskal's algorithm WEEK 12 Revision + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Sets & Functions (VOL 1) DOWNLOAD Calculus (VOL 2) DOWNLOAD GRAPH THEORY (VOL 3) DOWNLOAD Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Introductory Algebra: a real-world approach (4th Edition) - by Ignacio Bello About the Instructors Neelesh Upadhye Associate Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Mathematics,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Experienced Associate Professor with a demonstrated history of working in the higher education industry. Skilled in Mathematical Modeling, R, Stochastic Modeling, and Statistical Modeling. Strong education professional with a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) focused in Mathematical Statistics and Probability from Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. less Visit website Madhavan Mukund Director,
                           
                           
                           
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals. ... more He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014. In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking , BSCS2002 -
                                    Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python and BSCS2005 -
                                    Programming Concepts using Java View all Foundational Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                 
BSMA1002 Foundational Level Course Statistics for Data Science I The students will be introduced to large datasets. Using this data, the students will be introduced to various insights one can glean from the data. Basic concepts of probability also will be introduced during the course leading to a discussion on Random variables. by Usha Mohan Course ID: BSMA1002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Create, download, manipulate, and analyse data sets. Frame questions that can be answered from data in terms of variables and cases. Describe data using numerical summaries and visual representations. Estimate chance by applying laws of probability. Translate real-world problems into probability models. Calculating expectation and variance of a random variable. Describe and apply the properties of the Binomial Distribution and Normal distribution. Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction and type of data, Types of data, Descriptive and Inferential
statistics, Scales of measurement WEEK 2 Describing categorical data
Frequency distribution of
categorical data, Best practices for
graphing categorical data, Mode and median for
categorical variable WEEK 3 Describing numerical data
Frequency tables for numerical data, Measures of central tendency - Mean, median and mode, Quartiles and percentiles, Measures of dispersion - Range, variance, standard deviation and IQR, Five number summary WEEK 4 Association between two variables - 
Association between two categorical variables - Using relative frequencies in contingency tables, Association between two numerical variables - Scatterplot, covariance, Pearson correlation coefficient, Point bi-serial correlation coefficient WEEK 5 Basic principles of counting and factorial concepts - 
Addition rule of counting, Multiplication rule of
counting, Factorials WEEK 6 Permutations and combinations WEEK 7 Probability
Basic definitions of
probability, Events, Properties of probability WEEK 8 Conditional probability - 
Multiplication rule, Independence, Law of total probability, Bayes’ theorem WEEK 9 Random Variables - 
Random experiment, sample space and random variable, Discrete and continuous random variable, Probability mass function, Cumulative density function WEEK 10 Expectation and Variance -
Expectation of a discrete random variable, Variance and standard deviation of a discrete random variable WEEK 11 Binomial and poisson random variables  - 
Bernoulli trials, Independent and identically distributed random variable, Binomial random variable, Expectation and variance of abinomial random variable, Poisson distribution WEEK 12 Introduction to continous random variables - 
Area under the curve, Properties of pdf, Uniform distribution, Exponential distribution + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Descriptive Statistics (VOL 1) DOWNLOAD Probability and Probability Distributions (VOL 2) DOWNLOAD Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Introductory Statistics (10th Edition) - ISBN 9780321989178, by Neil A. Weiss published by Pearson Introductory Statistics (4th Edition) - by Sheldon M. Ross About the Instructors Usha Mohan Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Management Studies,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Usha Mohan holds a Ph.D. from Indian Statistical Institute. She has worked as a researcher in ISB Hyderabad and Lecturer at University of Hyderabad prior to joining IIT Madras. She offers courses in Data analytics, Operations research, and Supply chain management to under graduate, post graduate and doctoral students. In addition, she conducts training in Optimization methods and Data Analytics for industry professionals. Her research interests include developing quantitative models in operations management and combinatorial optimization. 

BSMA1003 Foundational Level Course Mathematics for Data Science II This course aims to introduce the basic concepts of linear algebra, calculus and optimization with a focus towards the application area of machine learning and data science. by Sarang S Sane Course ID: BSMA1003 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites: BSMA1001 -  Mathematics for Data Science I What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Manipulating matrices using matrix algebra. Performing elementary row operations. Using Gaussian Elimination: Solving systems of linear equations. Find out whether a set of vectors are linearly independent. Writing down a set of dependencies in case vectors are not linearly independent. Finding subspaces along with their bases and ranks. Finding distances and angles using norms and inner products. Obtaining orthonormal basis using the Gram-Schmidt process. Finding maxima and minima of single variable functions using derivatives. Finding maxima and minima of multivariate functions using vector calculus. Course structure & Assessments 11 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Vector and matrices -        
Vectors;
Matrices;
Systems of Linear Equations;
Determinants (part 1);
Determinants (part 2) WEEK 2 Solving linear equations -        
Determinants (part 3);
Cramer's Rule;
"Solutions to a system of linear equations
with an invertible coefficient matrix";
The echelon form;
Row reduction;
The Gaussian elimination method WEEK 3 Introduction to vector spaces -        
Introduction to vector spaces;
Some properties of vector spaces;
Linear dependence;
Linear independence - Part ;
Linear independence - Part 2 WEEK 4 Basis and dimension -        
What is a basis for a vector space?;
Finding bases for vector spaces;
What is the rank/dimension for a vector space;
Rank and dimension using Gaussian elimination WEEK 5 Rank and Nullity of a matrix;
Introduction to Linear transformation -        
The null space of a matrix : finding nullity and a basis - Part 1;
The null space of a matrix : finding nullity and a basis - Part 2;
What is a linear mapping - Part 1;
What is a linear mapping - Part 2;
What is a linear transformation WEEK 6 Linear transformation, Kernel and Images -       
Linear transformations, ordered bases and matrices;
Image and kernel of linear transformations;
Examples of finding bases for the kernel and image of a linear transformation WEEK 7 Equivalent and Similar matrices;
Introduction to inner products -        
Equivalence and similarity of matrices;
Affine subspaces and affine mappings;
Lengths and angles;
Inner products and norms on a vector space WEEK 8 Orthogonality, Orthonormality;
Gram-schmidt method - 
Orthgonality and linear independence;
What is an orthonormal basis?
Projections using inner products;
The Gram-Schmidt process;
Orthogonal transformations and rotations WEEK 9 Multivariable functions, Partial derivatives,
Limit, continuity and directional derivatives -        
Multivariable functions : visualization;
Partial derivatives;
Directional derivatives;
Limits for scalar-valued multivariable functions;
Continuity for multivariable functions;
Directional derivatives in terms of the gradient WEEK 10 Directional ascent and descent,
Tangent (hyper) plane,
Critical points -        
The directional of steepest ascent/descent;
Tangents for scalar-valued multivariable functions;
Finding the tangent hyper(plane);
Critical points for multivariable functions WEEK 11 Higher order partial derivatives,
Hessian Matrix and local extrema,
Differentiability -       
Higher order partial derivatives and the Hessian matrix;
The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y);
The Hessian matrix and local extrema for f(x,y,z);
Differentiability for Multivariable Functions;
Review of Maths - 2 + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Linear Algebra DOWNLOAD About the Instructors Sarang S Sane Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Mathematics,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras I completed my B.Stat. (Hons.) and M.Stat. from the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata in 2004 and my Ph.D. from TIFR, Mumbai in 2010. I was a postdoctoral fellow in TIFR, a visiting assistant professor in the University of Kansas and very briefly an INSPIRE faculty fellow in IISc, Bengaluru before I joined the mathematics department in IITM in 2015. 

BSMA1004 Foundational Level Course Statistics for Data Science II This second course will develop on the first course on statistics and further delve into the main statistical problems and solution approaches by Andrew Thangaraj Course ID: BSMA1004 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundational Pre-requisites: BSMA1002 -  Statistics for Data Science I BSMA1001 -  Mathematics for Data Science I Co-requisites: BSMA1003 -  Mathematics for Data Science II What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Recalling statistical modeling, description of data. Applying Probability distributions and related concepts to the data sets Explaining the concept of estimation of parameters. Solving the problems related to point and interval estimation. Explaining the concept of Testing of hypothesis related to mean and variance Analysing the data using simple regression models and setting up relevant hypothesis tests Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Multiple random variables - Two random variables, Multiple random variables and distributions WEEK 2 Multiple random variables - Independence, Functions of random variables - Visualization, functions of multiple random variables WEEK 3 Expectations Casino math, Expected value of a random variable, Scatter plots and spread, Variance and standard deviation, Covariance and correlation, Inequalities WEEK 4 Continuous random variables Discrete vs continuous, Weight data, Density functions, Expectations WEEK 5 Multiple continuous random variables - Height and weight data, Two continuous random variables, Averages of random variables - Colab
illustration, Limit theorems, IPL data - histograms and approximate distributions, Jointly Gaussian random variables Probability models for data - Simple models, Models based on other distributions, Models with multiple random variables, dependency, Models for IPL powerplay, Models from data WEEK 6 Refresher week WEEK 7 Estimation and Inference I WEEK 8 Estimation and Inference II WEEK 9 Bayesian estimation WEEK 10 Hypothesis testing I WEEK 11 Hypothesis Testing II WEEK 12 Revision week + Show all weeks Reference Documents / Books Joint Discrete Distributions (VOL 1) DOWNLOAD Joint Continuous Distributions (VOL 2) DOWNLOAD Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Probability and Statistics with Examples using R. Author: Siva Athreya, Deepayan Sarkar and Steve Tanner About the Instructors Andrew Thangaraj Professor
,
                           
                            
                                Electrical Engineering Department
,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Andrew Thangaraj received his B. Tech in Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras in 1998 and Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA in 2003. ... more He was a post-doctoral researcher at the GTL-CNRS Telecom lab at Georgia Tech Lorraine, Metz, France from Aug 2003 till May 2004. Since 2004, he has been a faculty at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, where he is currently a professor. His research interests are in the broad areas of information theory, error-control coding and information-theoretic aspects of cryptography. From Jan 2012 till Jan 2018, he served as Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Communications. From July 2018, he is an Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. From Nov 2011, he has been one of the NPTEL coordinators for IIT Madras. At NPTEL, he has played a key role in the starting of online courses and certification. He is currently a National MOOCs coordinator for NPTEL under the SWAYAM project of the MHRD. Prof. Andrew is also one of the coordinators for the IIT Madras Online BSc Degree Program, which was launched in June, 2020. less Visit website BSMA2001 Degree Level Course Mathematical Thinking To introduce ideas of proofs and problem solving in mathematics and to help in the transition from learning basic mathematical methods to the learning of more advanced mathematical methods and ideas. by Amritanshu Prasad , Sankaran Viswanath Course ID: BSMA2001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 8 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 triangular numbers, Sigma Notation for Summation, Sequences, Peano's axioms for the natural numbers,
Set Theory: the language of Mathematics, Hilbert Hotel, Bijections and Cardinality, The Natural Numbers,
The Integers WEEK 2 A Trip to Cantorsville, Cantor's Diagonalization Argument, Towards the Real Numbers, Ordered Field,
Completeness Axiom, The Least Upper Bound Property, Mathematical Logic and Statements WEEK 3 Currency Game, Divisibility, Greatest Common Divisor, The Euclidean Algorithm, Proof of the Euclidean
Algorithm, Test for Divisibility WEEK 4 Fermat's Little Theorem, Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, Modular Arithmetic, Arithmetic with
Congruences, Infinitude of Primes, Inclusion–Exclusion Principle WEEK 5 Proof of Inclusion-Exclusion Principle, Pigeonhole Principle, Sieve of Eratosthenes, More on the
Infinitude of Primes, Gaps Between Primes WEEK 6 Binomial Coefficients, Binomial Theorem, Lattice Paths, Random Sampling, Permutations, Example
of Inclusion-Exclusion Principle WEEK 7 Graph Theory - Introduction, Connectedness and Distance in Graphs, Adjacency Matrix, Graph Trees,
Sperners Lemma, Graph Coloring WEEK 8 Limit of a Sequence, Properties of Limits, Sequential Continuity, Continuity of Trigonometric
functions, Intermediate Value Theorem WEEK 9 Limit of Fibonacci series, Lamé formula, Sandwich Lemma, Shifting Lemma WEEK 10 Derivatives, Faà di Bruno's formula WEEK 11 Riemann Integrals, Mean Value Theorem WEEK 12 Uniform continuity, Fundamental theorem of calculus + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: “Mathematical Thinking: Problem-solving and Proofs”, John D’Angelo and Douglas West, Pearson, 2000 (2nd edition) “Mathematical Proofs: A Transition to Advanced Mathematics”, G. Chartrand, A. D. Polimeni, P. Zhang, Pearson, 2012 About the Instructors Amritanshu Prasad Professor,
                           
                            
                                The Institute of Mathematical Science,
                           
                           
                            Chennai Amritanshu Prasad is a mathematician at The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai, ... more working in algebraic combinatorics and representation theory. less Sankaran Viswanath Professor,
                           
                            
                                The Institute of Mathematical Science,
                           
                           
                            Chennai Sankaran Viswanath is a mathematician at The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai, ... more working in algebraic combinatorics and representation theory. less View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMA3012.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMA3012 Degree Level Course Linear Statistical Models To introduce linear statistical models and their applications in estimation and testing. The course will illustrate concepts  with specific examples, data sets  and numerical exercises using statistical package R. by Siva Athreya Course ID: BSMA3012 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Review of Estimation, Hypothesis Testing WEEK 2 Review of working with R-package WEEK 3 Least square estimation, estimable linear functions WEEK 4 Normal equations WEEK 5 Best Linear Unbiased Estimates (BLUEs). WEEK 6 Gauss-Markov Theorem. WEEK 7 Degrees of freedom. Fundamental Theorems of Least Square. WEEK 8 Testing of linear hypotheses. WEEK 9 One-way and two-way classification models WEEK 10 ANOVA and ANCOVA. WEEK 11 Nested models. Multiple comparisons WEEK 12 Introduction to random effect models. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Plane Answers to Complex Questions The Theory of Linear Models, Springer by R. Christensen. Linear Statistical Inference by C. R. Rao. About the Instructors Siva Athreya Professor,
                           
                           
                           
                            International Centre for Theoretical Sciences - TIFR and Indian Statistical Institute,
Bangalore Centre Siva Athreya received his Bachelor of Science (Honours) Mathematics from St. Stephen’s College, New Delhi, India in 1991. After obtaining a Master of Statistics from Indian Statistical Institute,  Kolkata, India in 1993 he obtained his PhD in Mathematics from the University of Washington, Seattle, U.S.A. in 1998. His research interests include: Stochastic Analysis (Stochastic Partial Differential Equations and Stochastic Differential Equations); Random walks among mobile traps; Random Graphs; Tree-valued Processes; Computational Epidemiology. He currently serves as Editor-in-Chief: Electronic Communications in Probability. less View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMA3014.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMA3014 Degree Level Course Statistical Computing To introduce computational methods involved in statistical estimation and learning problems. by Dootika Vats Course ID: BSMA3014 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to R, Introduction to Monte Carlo, Pseudorandom Number Generation, Sampling Discrete Random Variables: Inverse Transform Method WEEK 2 Discrete:  Accept-Reject Algorithm, Composition Method, Sampling Continuous Random Variables: Inverse Transform Method WEEK 3 Continuous: Accept-reject Algorithm with examples,  Box-Muller method WEEK 4 Continuous: Ratio-of-Uniforms method, examples and code, miscellaneous methods in sampling, Sampling from multivariate distritbutions WEEK 5 Simple Importance Sampling: Examples, bias, variance, consistency, Optimal proposals, WEEK 6 Weighted importance sampling: Examples, Review of likelihood functions, MLE examples WEEK 7 Linear regression as MLE, Penalized regression, No-closed form MLEs, Review of Taylor Series Approximations WEEK 8 Newton's optimization algorithm: examples and code, Gradient Descent algorithm, applications to logistic regression with code WEEK 9 MM algorithm, application to Bridge Regression, EM algorithm, Introduction to Gaussian Mixture Model WEEK 10 EM algorithm for GMM, Cross-validation with examples WEEK 11 Bootstrapping: examples and code. Application to bridge regression, stochastic gradient descent WEEK 12 Applications of SGD with code. Simulated annealing: examples, codes, and challenges + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: “Simulation” by Sheldon Ross, Elsevier, Fifth Edition “Monte Carlo Statistical Methods” by Christian Robert and George Casella, Springer, 2004. About the Instructors Dootika Vats Assistant Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
                           
                           
                            IIT Kanpur Dootika Vats is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur. Previously, she was an NSF Postdocotoral fellow with Prof. Gareth Roberts at the University of Warwick. Her PhD was from the University of Minnesota, Twin-Cities working with Prof. Galin Jones. less View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS2001.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS2001 Diploma Level Course Business Data Management A significant source of data sets and problems for data scientists will come from the business domain. This course provides a basic understanding of how businesses are organised and run from a data perspective. by Dr. G Venkatesh , Suresh Babu , Dr. Milind Gandhe Course ID: BSMS2001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Understand the business context: consumption patterns, micro-economic concepts underlying demand and supply Analyse firm-level and industry-level data Discover how businesses operate, and how they are actively managed using data dashboards Get a handle on the data that originates from business processes Identify the techniques used to represent and structure this data Gain skills on the use of worksheets to organise, interpret and present data Working with large data sets Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Consumption and demand: Micro & Macro economics: the role of data,  production, consumption and exchange, consumption baskets, sources of consumer survey data WEEK 2 Micro-economic concepts: Utility: cardinal vs ordinal, indifference curves. Demand and supply curves, changes in demand and elasticity. production cost, cost curves. Make vs buy decisions, production quantity decisions WEEK 3 Firm level strategies and performance data: Objectives and types of pricing strategies, analysis of firm performance - key ratios. Analysis examples: Ultratech, Page Industries, Nestle, TCS WEEK 4 Analysing industry level data: Industry definition and classification codes, IIP and PMI, industry market structure and concentration indices, competitive positioning in an industry - Porter's five forces. Analysis examples:  Cement industry, Textile industry, FMCG industry, IT industry WEEK 5 Case study 1 - Fabmart (E-Commerce): Introduction to E-Commerce, Fabmart case introduction, explanation of data set & questions to be answered, revenue pareto, volume pareto, scatter plot of sales and revenue, revenue trend WEEK 6 Fabmart case continued: Sales analysis, organisation of distribution centre, analysis of sales trends, average days of inventory, ledger, avoiding stockouts WEEK 7 Case study 2 - Ace Gears (Manufacturing):  Introduction to the manufacturing sector, context of the automotive industry during the years 2019-2021, explanation of data set containing monthly information on sales, production, inventory and costing. Revenue trend analysis, portfolio management WEEK 8 Ace Gears case study continued: 
Regional sales analysis, sales agent planning, production scheduling, scrap analysis, unit level profitability analysis, raw material re-ordering and safety stock WEEK 9 Case study 3 - Tech Enterprises (IT): Introduction to HR as a function, Introduction to the Tech Enterprises, internal sourcing, ranking of internal candidates, job description, sourcing channels and their analysis, recruitment process and onboarding WEEK 10 Case study 4 - PayBuddy (Fin Tech): Introduction to Finance Industry and Fintech, payment processing and money flow, new credit product introduction, nudge economics, payment transaction and customer data set, identifying rules to target the appropriate customers WEEK 11 Paybuddy case continued: Introduction to A/B testing, analysis of the  A/B testing data, credit risk evaluation, risk-return tradeoffs WEEK 12 Discussion on student acquired data sets. Wrap upaWrap up (summary) of the case studies, course project work + Show all weeks About the Instructors Dr. G Venkatesh Professor of Practice,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Venkatesh is a Professor of Practice at IIT Madras, where he is involved with several projects in the field of education. He is also a Fellow and Director of Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd, a leading Indian R&D services provider, and a founder of Mylspot, an education technology startup that aims to bridge knowledge gaps of students through a mentored learning platform. ... more Dr Venkatesh is a graduate in electronics from IIT Madras, PhD in Computer Science from TIFR, Mumbai and was a faculty member of the Computer Science & Engineering Dept of IIT Bombay for 8 years where his research interests revolved around declarative languages and their application to the design of embedded systems. He moved to the industry when Sasken was being formed, where he led their technology activities for over two decades. He was a visiting/adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore for 10 years and a Chair Professor in the department of EE at IIT Madras for 3 years. Dr. Venkatesh was elected as a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineers in 2006 and the IETE in 2012. He won the Technomentor award of the Indian Electronics and Semiconductor Association in 2013 and the Vasvik award for industrial research in 2015. Dr. Venkatesh serves on a number of government, industry and investor committees and boards in the areas of microelectronics, telecommunications and education. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking and BSMS2002 -
                                    Business Analytics Suresh Babu Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Suresh Babu has completed his M.S. in Development Economics and M.Phil. in Applied Economics before completing his Ph.D. from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. He currently is a professor at the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, and his key areas of research are in applied macroeconomics, trade & development and industrial economics. less Visit website Dr. Milind Gandhe Chief Programme Officer,
                           
                            
                                Machine Intelligence and Robotics (MINRO) COE,
                           
                           
                            IIIT Bangalore Milind is the Chief Program Officer at the Center of Excellence for Machine Intelligence and Robotics, IIIT Bangalore. Prior to joining IIITB, Milind has 26 years of experience in the corporate sector, first with Sasken Communication Technologies and most recently with Tata Elxsi as the head of the Systems Business Unit. Milind has lead projects in Semiconductor, Automotive, Communications and Smart Home verticals. ... more Milind has a PhD in Computer Science and Engineering from IIT Bombay. Before his PhD, Milind obtained a B.Tech and an M. Tech also from IIT Bombay. His thesis was on Abstract Interpretation of Functional Programming Languages. Milind also has a Diploma in Practicing Management from INSEAD, France. Milind’s primary research interests are AI (Natural Language Processing, Mathematical Logic, Hardware acceleration for AI at the Edge) and Interaction between Society and Technology. less View all Diploma Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS2001P.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS2001P Diploma Level Course Business Data Management - Project BDM Capstone Project is an independent research project where the student is expected to reach out to a business firm (either from organized sectors viz., well established businesses in manufacturing, IT, automobile sectors etc. which has excellent systems in place to handle and manage data or from an unorganized sectors like Kirana stores, vegetable vendors etc. which do not maintain proper records), identify the issues or the problem(s) they face, collect primary data pertaining to it, clean the data, analyze it, and provide novel/ valuable insights to the decision maker(s). by Dr. Ashwin J. Baliga , Dr. Aaditya Chandel , Dr. G Venkatesh , Dr. Milind Gandhe Course ID: BSMS2001P Course Credits: 2 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Co-requisites: BSMS2001 -  Business Data Management Project Course Overview In the proposal stage, the student is expected to provide information about the organization and its background, problem definition/ statement, the background of the problem, the problem-solving approach they wish to use with justification, the expected timelines for project completion and the probable outcomes of the project. In the midterm submission, students must provide a short video interaction clip with the business owner/ manager, tangible evidence like pictures, field notes etc., provide information on the meta data and descriptive statistics, conduct preliminary analysis, provide an interpretation of the results and findings. The final report submission is a complete report and involves in-depth explanation of the entire process from start to finish. The viva voce is conducted following acceptance of the final submission and for this, the student needs to make a presentation not exceeding 10 slides. What you’ll learn How to reach out and collect primary data, identify the issues or the problem(s), clean the data. Explain and justify the reasoning behind using a particular approach, report them in a professional manner, by knitting one section to the next and how the novel insights benefits decision maker(s). Hands-on experience in dealing with real world
problems and providing solutions. Reference Documents / Books Details of the BDM Project Course, Timelines & Submission Requirements DOWNLOAD About the Instructors Dr. Ashwin J. Baliga Assistant Professor,
                           
                           
                           
                            IESEG School of Management Dr. Ashwin J. Baliga is an Assistant Professor of Sales at IESEG School of Management, Paris Campus, France and has a PhD in B2B Marketing from IIT Madras. He is the recipient of the “IIT Madras Institute Research Award” for the exemplary research work done and received " Sri N Kannan Prize " for the Best PhD Thesis in Marketing at the 59th Convocation IIT Madras. Ashwin has published in Journal of Business Research, Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, International Journal of Mineral Processing and Harvard Business Publishing. His research interests are in B2B service failure and recovery, tech usage in sales, mental health, and well-being of B2B salespeople, B2B customer reacquisition, relationship reactivation, buyer- supplier relationships etc. less Dr. Aaditya Chandel Research Scientist,
                           
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Aaditya Chandel holds a PhD in Mechanical Engineering from IIT Madras and is currently working as a Research Scientist in IIT Madras. He has publications in Acta Mechanica and has an interest in the start-up eco system. His thesis investigated the effect of wall proximity on the wake of a rotating and translating sphere. He is the founder of QkRes Technologies and Research Services (https://www.qkres.com/), incubated in IIT Madras. less Dr. G Venkatesh Professor of Practice,
                           
                            
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Dr. Venkatesh is a Professor of Practice at IIT Madras, where he is involved with several projects in the field of education. He is also a Fellow and Director of Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd, a leading Indian R&D services provider, and a founder of Mylspot, an education technology startup that aims to bridge knowledge gaps of students through a mentored learning platform. ... more Dr Venkatesh is a graduate in electronics from IIT Madras, PhD in Computer Science from TIFR, Mumbai and was a faculty member of the Computer Science & Engineering Dept of IIT Bombay for 8 years where his research interests revolved around declarative languages and their application to the design of embedded systems. He moved to the industry when Sasken was being formed, where he led their technology activities for over two decades. He was a visiting/adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore for 10 years and a Chair Professor in the department of EE at IIT Madras for 3 years. Dr. Venkatesh was elected as a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineers in 2006 and the IETE in 2012. He won the Technomentor award of the Indian Electronics and Semiconductor Association in 2013 and the Vasvik award for industrial research in 2015. Dr. Venkatesh serves on a number of government, industry and investor committees and boards in the areas of microelectronics, telecommunications and education. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSCS1001 -
                                    Computational Thinking , BSMS2001 -
                                    Business Data Management and BSMS2002 -
                                    Business Analytics Dr. Milind Gandhe Chief Programme Officer,
                           
                            
                                Machine Intelligence and Robotics (MINRO) COE,
                           
                           
                            IIIT Bangalore Milind is the Chief Program Officer at the Center of Excellence for Machine Intelligence and Robotics, IIIT Bangalore. Prior to joining IIITB, Milind has 26 years of experience in the corporate sector, first with Sasken Communication Technologies and most recently with Tata Elxsi as the head of the Systems Business Unit. Milind has lead projects in Semiconductor, Automotive, Communications and Smart Home verticals. ... more Milind has a PhD in Computer Science and Engineering from IIT Bombay. Before his PhD, Milind obtained a B.Tech and an M. Tech also from IIT Bombay. His thesis was on Abstract Interpretation of Functional Programming Languages. Milind also has a Diploma in Practicing Management from INSEAD, France. Milind’s primary research interests are AI (Natural Language Processing, Mathematical Logic, Hardware acceleration for AI at the Edge) and Interaction between Society and Technology. less Other courses by the same instructor: BSMS2001 -
                                    Business Data Management View all Diploma Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS2002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS2002 Diploma Level Course Business Analytics The problems faced by decision makers in today’s business environments are extremely complex. Hence, the task of making good decisions is not easy. The answer is in building quantitative models, and this course is designed to help you understand the fundamentals of this critical, foundational, business skill. The business application of statistical methods is the core focus of this course. In that sense, the course builds on the core course in the first year of the program. That basic course focused on the preliminaries of the area. This course highlights a business application and then demonstates an application of a statistical techique to solve that scenario and arrive at the best decisions and insights. by Rahul R Marathe Course ID: BSMS2002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites: BSMS2001 -  Business Data Management What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS At the end of the this course, the students will be able to apply various statistical techniques to solve various business problems. Extrapolate using various techniques and with statistical robustness. Build data-centric business models. Course structure & Assessments 8 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Data dashboarding Insights from data summary WEEK 2 Can summarizing the data provide insights? WEEK 3 Do people in different cities prefer different
brand? WEEK 4 Predicting the stock returns – Regression basics WEEK 5 How do you pay a professor? – Regression diagnostics - Path variables WEEK 6 Can I cure cancer? – Logistic Regression - Connection with classification problem WEEK 7 What is the impact of repeatedly watching the same ad? Repeated measures ANOVA WEEK 8 When the data has a time axis: Time series modeling + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: SF Robert E Stine and Dean Foster, Statistics for Business: Decision Making and Analysis, Pearson. NCT Paul Newbold, William L. Carlson and Betty Thorne, Statistics for Business and Economics, Sixth Edition, Pearson. ASW David R. Anderson, Dennis J. Sweeney and Thomas A. Williams, Statistics for Business and Economics, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning. Keller Gerald Keller, Managerial Statistics, 9 Edition, Cengage Learning. LR Richard Levin and David Rubin, Statistics for Management, Seventh Edition, Pearson. About the Instructors Rahul R Marathe Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Management Studies,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Rahul R Marathe is a Associate Professor at IIT Madras in the Department of Management Studies. He obtained his Ph. D and M.S from Iowa State University in Industrial Engineering and Statistics, and his B.E in Production Engineering from Mumbai University. less Visit website View all Diploma Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS3001.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS3001 Degree Level Course Design Thinking for Data-Driven App Development This course helps you learn the basics of Design Thinking in an experiential way. This course aims at empathy-led data-driven app development approach for data scientists. The learners will launch a fully functioning app in a real app store at the end of the course. by Bala Ramadurai , Prathap Haridoss Course ID: BSMS3001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn Recall the basics of Design Thinking Apply Agile method to developing software Design an App using the principles of Design Thinking Develop an App for Android Collaborate with other developers using git version control method Learn the basics of marketing and customer support through their website Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to Design Thinking – Course outline and projects, Intro to the Design of Everyday Things, Intro to Design Thinking in software apps, Project management WEEK 2 Empathize – P1 – Persona Creation, Customer Journey Mapping, Design Paradox, Demo on a real problem WEEK 3 Empathize – P1 – List of problems, How Might We questions, Demo on a real problem WEEK 4 Analyze – P1 – Multi-Why, Conflict of Interest, Demo on a real problem WEEK 5 Solve – P1 – Silent brainstorming, Inventive Principles, Concept creation, Demo on a real problem WEEK 6 Test – P1, Empathize – P2 Assumptions, Features, Field trials, Basics of Digital Marketing WEEK 7 Website Development, User Experience Design, Prototypes WEEK 8 Analyze – P2 WEEK 9 Solve – P2 WEEK 10 Test – P2, Empathize – P3 – Obtaining insights/ feedback from the customers or target users WEEK 11 Analyze – P3 WEEK 12 Test – P3, Launch of the App + Show all weeks About the Instructors Bala Ramadurai Consultant, Dr. Bala Ramadurai is an author, coach, consultant and professor. He has authored a book on Design Thinking called Karmic Design Thinking (https://dt.balaramadurai.net). ... more He has 3 patents to his credit and 10+ publications in international research journals. He co-founded TRIZ Innovation India (https://trizindia.org) and is an Adjunct Professor at Symbiosis Institute of Business Management, India (https://www.sibmpune.edu.in). He currently mentors an EdTech enterprise called Knoin Electronics (https://knoin.org) He is a professor at National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (https://nptel.ac.in). He has a PhD from Arizona State University, USA, and a B.Tech from IIT Madras, India. less Visit website Prathap Haridoss Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prathap Haridoss is currently the Dean (Academic Courses) and a Professor in the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at IIT Madras. He did his B.Tech in Metallurgical Engineering from IIT Madras and got his Ph. D. from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. He worked as a Senior Scientist in Plug Power New York, before joining IIT Madras as a Faculty. His research interests include Fuel Cell and Carbon Nanomaterials. Prathap Haridoss was also one of the coordinators of NPTEL (National Program on Technology Enhanced Learning) and the IIT Madras B.S. Degree Program. less Visit website View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS3002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS3002 Degree Level Course Market Research To provide a basic understanding of research methodology and its implementation in different business domains, to understand the role, scope, process, cost, and value of marketing research, to match research techniques to marketing problems, to analyse data and translate them into actionable findings, to enable students to do hands-on research to solve business problems. by Ashok Sankethi Course ID: BSMS3002 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Identify and distinguish marketing problems from symptoms Translate marketing problems into researchable questions Select appropriate research designs to answer your research questions Select suitable methods of data collection Analyze the data using appropriate statistical methods to give the results Interpret the results to help solve the marketing problems. Course structure & Assessments For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Marketing Research, the Research Process and Problem Formulation: The Role of Research in Marketing and the Marketing Research Process, Defining the Marketing Research Problem and Developing an Approach WEEK 2 Research Design Formulation: Research Design, Exploratory Research Design, Descriptive Research Design, Causal Research Design and Test Markets WEEK 3 Designing Data Collection Methods and Forms: Surveys and Interviews, Measurement, Measurement Scales, Questionnaires, and Instruments WEEK 4 Different Market Research Applications, and the Industry Approach to each: Key marketing issues like new product development, STP, branding, etc. and the MR tools and techniques to address each WEEK 5 Data Analysis and Interpretation: Entering the Data in SPSS, Examining the Data and Univariate Data Analysis: Descriptive Statistics, Cross Tabulation, Graphical Display of Data, Chart Deception and Hypothesis Testing: Mean Differences, ANOVA, Multivariate Data Analysis: An Overview, Exploratory Factor Analysis, Cluster Analysis, Multiple Regression in SPSS + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Prescribed Textbooks:
 
Naresh K. Malhotra and Satyabhusan Dash., Marketing Research, An Applied Orientation, Pearson Education, 7th Edition, 2019.
William G. Zikmund, Barry J. Babin, Jon C. Carr, Atanu Adhikari and Mitch Griffin, Business Research Methods, A South Asian Perspective, Cengage Learning, 9th Edition, 2013. Reference Books:
 
Alan Bryman and Emma Bell, Business Research Methods 3rd Edition, Oxford Publication, 2011.
Hair, Anderson, Tatham and Black, Multivariate Data Analysis, Pearson Education.
Andy P. Field, Discovering Statistics using SPSS, SAGE, 5th Edition, 2000.
Gilbert A Churchill, Basic Marketing Research, 7th Edition, Fort Worth, Dryden Press, 1999. About the Instructors Ashok Sankethi Ashok R Sankethi is an MR veteran who set up Kaybase in 2005. He has over 25 years of experience in the industry, and worked in leading multinational research firms as well as in small set-ups before setting out on his own. He has developed and maintained a strong connection with academics over the years, he and his colleagues teach at leading business schools, and Ashok sits on the doctoral committees of several Ph. D scholars. Moreover, along with his colleague Poornima Bhaskaran, he has published a book called Kay’s Book of MR – which is the first book of case studies from an industry perspective. This book is now being used by faculty at over 15 business schools in the country. less View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS3033.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS3033 Degree Level Course Managerial Economics -To learn the workings of markets through the prism of Demand and Supply.
-Understand how a rational consumer makes any choice. 
-Learn the relationships between production, costs, and profits 
-Learn different forms of markets and their key characteristics.
-Understand how governments regulate businesses.
-Learn the business model behind the success of Amazon, UBER, Alibaba, iPhone by Vimal Kumar Course ID: BSMS3033 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction WEEK 2 Demand, Supply, and markets WEEK 3 Elasticity and Empirical Methods for Demand Analysis WEEK 4 Consumer Behavior WEEK 5 Technology, Production, and Costs WEEK 6 Perfectly Competitive Market WEEK 7 Monopoly WEEK 8 Monopsony and Monopolistic Competition WEEK 9 Decisions under Risk and Uncertainty WEEK 10 Asymmetric Information WEEK 11 Government and Businesses WEEK 12 Platform Businesses + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Managerial Economics by Jeffery Perloff and James Brander Intermediate Microeconomics by Hal Varian Managerial Economics: A Problem Solving Approach by Luke Froeb, Brian McCannm, Mikhael Shor, and Michael Ward About the Instructors Vimal Kumar Associate Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Economic Science,
                           
                           
                            IIT Kanpur View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS3034.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS3034 Degree Level Course Foundations of Finance Course ID: BSMS3034 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to Finance WEEK 2 Present Value, Annuities and Perpetuities WEEK 3 Capital Budgeting Rules, Time Varying Rates of Return, Uncertainty, Default and Risk WEEK 4 Investment: Risk and Rewards, Choice Under Uncertainty WEEK 5 Portfolio Theory WEEK 6 Capital Asset Pricing Theory WEEK 7 Other Pricing Models: Factor Models, Arbitrage Pricing Theory WEEK 8 Market Efficiency: Market Imperfections, and Applications to Capital Budgeting Rules WEEK 9 Introduction to Derivative Securities and Basic Options Theory I WEEK 10 Introduction to Derivative Securities and Basic Options Theory II WEEK 11 Foreign Exchange Markets and International Financial System WEEK 12 Financial Crises + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Corporate Finance by Ivo Welch. Investment Science by David Luenberger. Oxford University Press. The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets Book by Frederic Mishkin.
Pearson. View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS4001.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS4001 Degree Level Course Industry 4.0 To describe various facets of Industry 4.0, to connect questions raised by Industry 4.0 with appropriate data science techniques, to develop data science tools for Industry 4.0, and to build data-centric business models. by Rahul R Marathe Course ID: BSMS4001 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to Industry 4.0 – Evolution and history WEEK 2 Pillars of Industry 4.0 WEEK 3 Industry 4.0 – India context WEEK 4 Supplier selection as a classification problem WEEK 5 Manufacturing 4.0 WEEK 6 Prognosis WEEK 7 Quality 4.0 WEEK 8 Inventory Optimization WEEK 9 Dynamic Pricing WEEK 10 Logistics 4.0 WEEK 11 Future of Manufacturing Business Focus on new paradigm WEEK 12 Next decade of Industry 4.0 + Show all weeks About the Instructors Rahul R Marathe Professor,
                           
                            
                                Department of Management Studies,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Rahul R Marathe is a Associate Professor at IIT Madras in the Department of Management Studies. He obtained his Ph. D and M.S from Iowa State University in Industrial Engineering and Statistics, and his B.E in Production Engineering from Mumbai University. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: BSMS2002 -
                                    Business Analytics View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSMS4023.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSMS4023 Degree Level Course Game Theory and Strategy - Learn how to think of social and economic aspects of life via mathematical models.
- Learn how game theory is applied to think about problems in information economy. Course ID: BSMS4023 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Elective Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction and General Principles WEEK 2 Games with Simultaneous Moves I WEEK 3 Games with Simultaneous Move II WEEK 4 Games with Sequential Moves WEEK 5 Combining Sequential and Simultaneous Moves and Mixed Strategies WEEK 6 Evolutionary game Theory WEEK 7 Matching Problem, Gale-Shapley Algorithm WEEK 8 Voting, Cascades, and Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem WEEK 9 Cooperative Games, Shapley Values WEEK 10 Fair Division, Bankruptcy Problems WEEK 11 Auctions WEEK 12 Network Effects + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Games of Strategy by Avinash Dixit and Susan Skeath. W.W. Norton & Company
Insights into Game Theory: An Alternative Mathematical Experience by Ein-Ya Gura,
and Michael Maschler. Cambridge University Press. Networks, Crowds and Markets: Reasoning About a Highly Connected World by
David Easley, and Jon Kleinberg. Cambridge University Press. View all Degree Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSSE2001.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSSE2001 Diploma Level Course System Commands by Prof. Gandham Phanikumar Course ID: BSSE2001 Course Credits: 3 Course Type: Programming Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Course structure & Assessments 8 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to GNU/Linux OS.
Setting up and running Linux environment. 
The command line environment.
Knowing hardware of your machine 
Information - commands such as hwinfo, lshw, df, free etc.
Diagnostics - commands to fetch hardware information such as battery state, memory modules etc.,
Knowing the OS and software of your machine
Commands to get details about operating system, versions etc. 
Packages - installed / available
Input / output redirection. WEEK 2 Introduction to packages and repositories.
Using 'apt' commands to manage packages.         
File types and related commands.
Understanding file permissions and access modes.
Managing file permissions through symbolic and numeric mode.
Concept of environment variables. Important environment variables such as $HOME, $USER and $PATH WEEK 3 Managing shell variables.
Prompt strings.
Symbolic links and hard links, brief introduction to inode numbers.
Exploring the root file system and related commands.
Using shell shortcuts with commands. 
Slicing output.
Managing programs currently running on the machine.
Shell access to a local / remote machine. WEEK 4 Redirection to script, variable and for logging purpose.
Using pipes.
Introduction to regex; using regex patterns and egrep.
Using egrep to extract useful information from files.
find command and its uses - patterns to pick specific files in a folder, using exec 
Command line editors (nano, vi, emacs - syntax highlighting & prompting, configuring options)
Writing and running simple Bash scripts. WEEK 5 How are shell scripts interpreted?
Using variables in scripts.
Passing command line arguments to scripts, to create your own commands.
More shell programming.
Writing conditional statements using if /else / fi.                 
Introduction to loops.                 
Using functions        
Configuring startup / periodic / recurring tasks WEEK 6 Text processing using AWK language.         
Using awk to run statics on a data file.        
Using regex within awk.        
Awk as a programming language
Introduction to 'sed' – another text processing utility.
Line by line processing to replace a regex pattern with a string.        
Use of place holders for matching regex patterns for use in replacing strings. WEEK 7 Introduction to make utility; concept of target and dependency; actions performed by make; conditional compilation; passing shell variables to make;
File packaging utilities such as compress, tar, zip, gzip, bzip2, xz.
Networking concepts
Introduction to IP addresses.
Concept of localhost. Intranet and public addresses.
Concept of ports and services that run on these ports.        
Concept of DNS and Domain names.
Network diagnostics using tools and commands.
Scripting a tool for analysis of logs. WEEK 8 Introduction to RAID for handling hardware failure.
Introduction to version control
Git as a version control system:
Overview of Git workflow 
Branches, repositories, forks, etc.
Creating and merging pull requests.
Personal access tokens.
Managing changes as local and remote.
Working demo of a public repository using Git
Approval workflow 
How a team collaborates on the private repository in an organization.
Managing pull requests for the owner, raising issues and resolving them. + Show all weeks About the Instructors Prof. Gandham Phanikumar Professor,
                           
                            
                                Metallurgical and Materials Engineering,
                           
                           
                            IIT Madras Prof. Gandham Phanikumar's doctoral work is on heat transfer, fluid flow and solute transfer during laser processing of dissimilar metals. After joining IIT Madras in 2005, he has been teaching a UG core course on transport phenomena for several years. His research continues to involve concepts of transport phenomena in materials processing. less Visit website View all Diploma Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\course_pages\BSSE2002.html
Course Page - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी | ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Term Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Courses Diploma Level Courses Degree Level Courses Sample Certificates Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Resources Events Help Videos In the Media Archive Student Life Student Life PARADOX / Student Festivals Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Contact Us Merchandise Partnerships SIGN IN Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications Open now for September 2024 Batch | Applications Close: Sep 15, 2024 | Exam: Oct 27, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics BSSE2002 Diploma Level Course Tools in Data Science This course will teach students to use popular tools for sourcing data, transforming it, building and optimizing models, communicating these as visual stories, and deploying them in production. by S Anand Course ID: BSSE2002 Course Credits: 3 Course Type: Data Science Pre-requisites:
                           
                                None Co-requisites: BSCS2004 -  Machine Learning Foundations Course structure & Assessments 8 modules over 12 weeks of coursework, online assignments for each module, 1 remote online exam, 2 take home projects, 1 in-person end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. MODULE 1 Discover the data MODULE 2 Get the data MODULE 3 Prepare the data MODULE 4 Model the data MODULE 5 Modern tools to simplify deep learning models MODULE 6 Design your output MODULE 7 Narrate a story MODULE 8 Deploy the results + Show all weeks About the Instructors S Anand Anand is a co-founder of Gramener, a data science company. He leads a team that tells visual stories from data. He is recognized as one of India’s top 10 scientists, and is a regular TEDx speaker. ... more Anand is a gold medallist from IIM Bangalore and an alumnus of IIT Madras, London Business School, IBM, Infosys Consulting, Lehman Brothers, and BCG. More importantly, he has hand-transcribed every Calvin & Hobbes strip ever, is addicted to Minecraft (thanks to his daughter), and dreams of watching every film on the IMDb Top 250 (except The Shining). less Visit website View all Diploma Level courses Contact Us support@study.iitm.ac.in 7850999966 IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Please use ONLY the above methods for any queries regarding the program.
                  Our normal response time is 3 working days. It might take a little longer during busy periods.
                  We will share Google Meet links during such periods.
                  Due to the high volume of calls we receive every day, there might be long wait times.
                  In some cases, you might have to call multiple times to successfully connect to us. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. View Site Map © IIT Madras. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\placements\academics.html
Placements and Internships IITM BSc Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Curriculum IIT Madras offers the BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science with a unique model of learning combining online course delivery with in-person evaluation making it a first of its kind in the world.
                      Students will be admitted to the program through a unique qualifier process.
                      A student will have to complete 31 courses (116 Credits) to get a BSc in Programming and Data Science from IIT Madras. Want to know more about the IITM BSc Program? Click here Courses A learner has to complete three levels (Foundation, Diploma, Degree) to get a BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science from IIT Madras. The courses offered in different levels are given below. Foundational Level Foundational in Data Science and Programming English 1 Math 1 Statistics 1 Computational Thinking English 2 Math 2 Statistics 2 Python Learn More Diploma Level Diploma in Programming Database Management Systems Programming, Data Structures & Algorithms using Python Modern Application Development 1 Modern Application Development 2 Programming Concepts Using Java System Commands Diploma in Data Science Machine Learning Foundations Machine Learning Technique Machine Learning Practice Business Data Management Business Analytics Tools in Data Science Learn More Degree Level BSc Degree in Data Science and Programming Core 1 - Operating Systems & Computer Architecture Core 2 - Software Testing & Software Engineering Core 3 -   AI: Search Methods for Problem Solving & Deep Learning Design Thinking Speech Technology Deep Learning in Practice Thematic Ideas in Data Science Special topics in Machine Learning Computer Vision Learn More Detailed description of courses can be found here . CGPA calculation Students are evaluated at the end of every term (4 months) based on their performance in in-centre quizzes, online proctored programming exams, end term exam as well as viva ( in some courses ). Program follows Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) system.
              CGPA is on a scale of 0 to 10. Each course carries a certain number of credit ranging from 1 to 4. Letter grades and CGPA are awarded to learners based on the following criteria : For the CGPA, a similar formula is used where the sum Σ i C i is the sum of the credits of all the courses taken in all the terms successfully completed up to that point in time. If a course was repeated for any reason, the best grade obtained will be considered. Contact Us IITM BSc Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Phone: 7850-999966 (Mon-Fri 9am-6pm) Email: iic@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Resources IITM BSc Online Degree - Official Website Partner with us! Overview Presentation Placement & Internship Brochure our directions © Copyright IIT Madras . All Rights Reserved
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\placements\contact.html
Placements and Internships IITM BSc Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Email-Us iic@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Call-Us +91 7200405382 (Mon-Fri 9am-6pm) Request a Call Back Use this form We will get in touch with you very soon. Our Team Mr. Balaraju Kondaveeti Head, Industry Interaction Cell balaraju@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Prof. Balaji Shrinivasan Placement Advisor, IITM BSc Degree balaji@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Abhishek Vinodh Student Placement co-ordinator placo@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Student Representatives Anabil Kanungoe 21f1003580@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Harshit Katiyar 21f1006135@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in C S Sruthi 21f1006510@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Jigyasa 21f1001644@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Nivetha B 21f1000424@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Sowmya R 21f1006666@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Meghana Anand 21f1004629@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Anam Shad 21f1006523@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Amogh Agrawal 21f1002266@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Aryaman Singh 21f1004465@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Kaveya Sivaprakasam 21f1006594@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Gourav Katha 21f1000778@student.onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Contact Us IITM BSc Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Phone: 7850-999966 (Mon-Fri 9am-6pm) Email: iic@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Resources IITM BSc Online Degree - Official Website Partner with us! Overview Presentation Placement & Internship Brochure our
                            directions © Copyright IIT Madras . All Rights Reserved
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\placements\index.html
Placements and Internships IITM BSc Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Welcome to Placements and Internships IIT Madras BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science World's first Hybrid Degree from Top Technical Institute in India IIT Madras has been ranked the No.1 Engineering Institute in the country for the past 5 years Awarded No. 1 in Innovative Education IIT Madras has been recognized as the Most Innovative Educational
                        Institute in India by Atal Innovation Rankings, consistently for the last 3 years. Industry Interaction Cell IITM BSc Degree IIC (Industry Interaction Cell) is the Training and Placement cell of IITM BSc Degree Program. 
                                    We aim to provide the best opportunities to our students with industry relevant skills and right attitude. [Recruiters] For partnership details, please visit Recruiters' page [Students] For upcoming training sessions and past recorded sessions, visit Students' page Why recruit from IIT Madras BSc ? Institute of Eminence IIT Madras is known both nationally and
                                                internationally for excellence in technical education, basic and applied
                                                research, innovation, entrepreneurship and industrial consultancy. Coordinating the largest MOOCs Platform in India IITM began the NPTEL program, the country’s first
                                                online content portal as an inter-IIT consortium project in 2003 and
                                                nptel.ac.in is one of the largest online course portals in the world. In
                                                2014, NPTEL,IITM started online certification courses - the country’s Largest
                                                Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) platform. Students Our students cohort is unique, comprising of
                                                both students and working professionals. Learners go through a rigourous course work from IIT Madras. Faculty Faculty of international repute offering industry relevant curriculum to the BSc students. 655 Learners 2300+ Hours of video learning 101 Working Professionals 1700+ Hours of hands on learning Program Highlights The academic rigour is on par with the on-campus students. Courses are offered online with maximum flexibility. In-person quizzes and end term exams. Our students are available for internships from May 2022. Our students will be available for placements from September 2022. Download brochure for more information. To know more about our program structure, visit Academics Page Director's Message IIT Madras started this unique BSc program to provide access to IIT quality education
                                    to the learners across the country. Data Science is a growing field and the demand
                                    for skilled resources in the market is very high. IIT Madras has a rich history of
                                    providing high-quality education and this program is designed to underline the fact
                                    that IIT is within the reach of everyone. This BSc program is meticulously drafted
                                    and is aligned with the goals of the National Educational Policy. We are planning to
                                    make IIT Madras a ‘Vishwa-guru (Global Teacher)’ through innovative approaches to
                                    enhance the quality of education. In order to encourage the students from financially
                                    disadvantaged backgrounds to pursue this program, scholarships are being provided. Prof. V. Kamakoti Director, IIT Madras Testimonials from Industry Experts Mr. Sandeep Alur Director - Microsoft Technology Centre, India 'Programs like these, which are so near and real to reality in the outside world
                                        , makes one ready faster for the outside world.'' Watch Video Dr. Kingshuk Banerjee Partner - Cognitive Computing and Analytics, IBM Services 'What IIT Madras brings extra to this program is the 
                                            Industry-Academia Partnership and not an Ivory Tower experience.' Watch Video Mr. Varadharaj V.P - Talent Acquisition, Infosys 'There are tremendous opportunities for Data Scientists and people who go through this program will have significant addition of value coming out of their capabilities and competencies.' Watch Video Dr. Manish Gupta Director - Google Research India 'I am really happy to see this program which will help us create a new generation of Data Scientists coming from diverse backgrounds because a lot of meaningful things that we could do in the future will come from a deep understanding of computing and the problem space (domain expertise).' Watch Video Dr. Shankar Venugopal V.P - Mahindra & Mahindra 'A lot of disruptions in the Automotive industry in terms of technology as well as business models has created a need for engineers to upskill this program has come at the right time. I see great opportunity in data  and we are very eager to create those roles and hire a lot of these young engineers.' Watch Video Contact Us IITM BSc Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Phone: 7850-999966 (Mon-Fri 9am-6pm) Email: iic@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Resources IITM BSc Online Degree - Official Website Partner with us! Overview Presentation Placement & Internship Brochure our
                            directions © Copyright IIT Madras . All Rights Reserved
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\placements\recruiters.html
Placements and Internships IITM BSc Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Welcome Recruiters IIT Madras invites Industry Partners for its BSc in Programming and Data Science program - India’s very first UG program offered through a hybrid mode of delivery. Connect with us by writing to iic@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in or fill this form to contact us. Download the brochure to know more about our course and students. Recruitment Process The Training and Placement team at IIT Madras will be showcasing students with suitable skills and right attitude needed to achieve the organization's goals. Our team will provide all the needed support with the end-to-end recruitment process. Get started by scheduling a call with us or contact us. Recruitment FAQs What time of year does the recruitment process take place? The recruitment process takes place throughout the calendar year. What information must be essentially provided by the company for internships /
                                    placements? The information that students
                                    typically look for in a corporate presentation is: Company profile Role & Job description Locations - Remote / on-site Stipend / Salary details Duration of Job / Hours of work What are the various ways for recruiting students? Students can be recruited for: 3 to 6 month's internship Full time placement Can we conduct recruitment processes through online mode or offline mode? We prefer the online recruitment process as it will be easy for the students to attend the interview. We have students spread across the country, online interviews will be effective and will surely attract active participation from the students. Should the company take care of the entire process? No, Our BSc degree team will be coordinating with the students and the company until the internship / job offer is released. For your other queries to be answered, Contact Us Skills Acquired As the course progresses in diploma level, learners get to learn the following skills
                            with hands on practice as well. Ranging from strong fundamentals in Python programming,
                            one gets to embark on a journey
                            of various programming and Data Science courses. Student Highlights Following are some of the projects done by our learners in the diploma courses of Business Data Management and
                            Modern Applicaton Development. Loading, Please wait Partner with Us Following are the various ways in which companies and organizations can partner, contribute and benefit : For more information, please visit our partnership page. Contact Us IITM BSc Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Phone: 7850-999966 (Mon-Fri 9am-6pm) Email: iic@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Resources IITM BSc Online Degree - Official Website Partner with us! Overview Presentation Placement & Internship Brochure our
                            directions © Copyright IIT Madras . All Rights Reserved
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\ds\placements\students.html
Placements and Internships IITM BSc Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us Home Students Recruiters Academics Contact us News and Upcoming Events Loading... Placement Guidelines Eligibility Criteria for internships For internship support to be provided, a learner should fulfill following criteria. Students should pursue IITM BSc Degree without other commitments (on-campus degree or full-time job) Working Professionals are not eligible to apply. Students should have completed 4 courses + 2 course projects in the diploma level. Students will have to fulfill training requirements before they apply for internships. Students will be allowed to apply once they complete at least one diploma. Non-refundable Registration fees - Rs. 1800 (incl GST) Eligibility Criteria for Placement General Eligibility: If students are pursuing their on-campus degree, those closer to completing their on-campus degree only will be allowed to register for training & placements. Such students are expected to submit their graduation certificate or a letter from the college stating the year and month of course completion. Students have to fulfill training requirements before they apply. Placement support is provided based on the relevant exits. Non-refundable Registration fees - Rs. 2400 (incl GST) Type of recruitment support Criteria Placement Support after Single Diploma Exit Register for training & placements. Students from Direct Admission to Diploma batch are also considered. Placement Support after Diploma Level Exit Register for training & placements. Students from Direct Admission to Diploma batch are also considered. Placement Support after BSc Degree Exit Only students closer to completing their IITM BSc degree will be allowed to register for training & placements, i.e. students with few courses to complete (N+3 courses = 31, where N is no. of courses completed and registered) in the degree level will be allowed to register. Placements/Internships Policy Policy for Students who reject Jobs/Internships - Students who reject either internship or job offers after receiving offer letters through IIT Madras will not be given any placement or internship support in the future. Students who skip the interviews/written tests will also be ineligible to get  any placement or internship support in the future. Students who are doing on-campus courses or pursuing 2 courses in a given term will not be given preference unless they agree to the above condition. Attendance/offer policy Attendance for placement tests is compulsory, we encourage our students to attend the tests to measure various skills in order to improve one's employability. Students cannot forgo any selection process conducted by the companies they have registered for. This includes group discussions and interviews. Failure in abiding by the above would result in the indeﬁnite suspension of the access to the placement process. A student can have at the most one offer in hand at the end of the placement process. General Instructions Apply for companies wisely! Be clear about your choice of proﬁle and weigh your chances well. Students found in possession of prohibited items, or caught indulging in unfair practices during the tests will lead to the suspension of access to the placement process with immediate effect and would invite further disciplinary action. This will be enforced very strictly. Training Activities Training Schedule for Loading, Please wait FAQs Loading... Contact Us IITM BSc Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036 Phone: 7850-999966 (Mon-Fri 9am-6pm) Email: iic@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in Resources IITM BSc Online Degree - Official Website Partner with us! Overview Presentation Placement & Internship Brochure our directions © Copyright IIT Madras . All Rights Reserved
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\es\aboutIITM.html
About IIT Madras and Our Experience in Online Education English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी| ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calender Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us Applications open now for May 2024 Batch. Application Close: May 28th, 2024 | Exam: Jul 07th, 2024 APPLY NOW Home About IITM About IIT Madras Indian Institute of Technology Madras is one of the foremost institutes of national importance for higher
                            technical education and research. In 1956, the German Government offered technical assistance in establishing an institute of higher education in
                            engineering in India. The first Indo-German agreement in Bonn, West Germany for the establishment of the Indian
                            Institute of Technology at Madras was signed in 1959. The Institute was formally inaugurated in 1959 by Prof. Humayun Kabir, Union Minister for Scientific Research
                            and Cultural Affairs. The IIT system has twenty three Institutes of Technology. The first of these to be
                            instituted are at Kharagpur (estb. 1951), Mumbai (estb. 1958), Chennai (estb. 1959), Kanpur (estb. 1959), Delhi
                            (estb. 1961), Guwahati (estb. 1994) and Roorkee (estb. 1847, joined IITs in 2001). The Institute has sixteen academic departments and several advanced research centres in various disciplines of
                            engineering and pure sciences. A faculty of international repute, a brilliant student community, excellent
                            technical & supporting staff and an effective administration have all contributed to the pre-eminent status of
                            IIT Madras. The campus is located in the city of Chennai, previously known as Madras. Chennai is the state
                            capital of Tamil Nadu, a southern state in India. We have been ranked number 1 Engineering Institute for the past 6 years and we have been ranked number 1 Overall
                            for the past 2 years by NIRF. IITM’s Experience in Online Education IITM is well-equipped to provide online programs, which has been proven with its experience in the NPTEL and BS
                            in Data Science programs. National Program on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL) Furthermore, IITM began the NPTEL program, the country’s first online content portal as an inter-IIT consortium
                            project in 2003 and nptel.ac.in is one of the largest online course repository in the world for engineering content. In 2014, NPTEL started
                            offering courses for certification and currently more than 1300 courses are offered for certification per year,
                            with more than 40 lakh enrollments and 8 lakh students registering for exams. NPTEL also manages the national MOOCs portal - swayam.gov.in as well as the network of more than 5300 SWAYAM local chapter colleges. IIT Madras’ BS in Data Science and Applications Based on the experience gained from NPTEL, IIT Madras launched the 4 year BS degree program in Data Science and
                            Applications study.iitm.ac.in/ds. This program has a non-JEE qualifier based entry into the program and is open to learners from all streams and
                            backgrounds, requiring nothing more than English and Maths at std X and completion of std XII. More than 16000
                            students study in the program, which is now in its third year of offering. The program can be paced by the learner who can select the number of courses they wish to register every term
                            and there are multiple exits such as the Foundation level certificate, Diploma in programming, Diploma in data
                            Science, BSc in programming and Data Science and finally the BS degree. Based on the number of credits accrued,
                            the exits are available. Students in the program also are provided with opportunities to interact by means of the groups and houses into
                            which they are divided and actively participate in the techno-sports-cultural festival called Paradox that is
                            held on IITM campus in the month of May. Many students are actively pursuing internships and some have even been recruited by companies already. The
                            success of this program is what spurred the team to design and launch the second BS degree in Electronic
                            Systems. Relevant Links www.iitm.ac.in /ReachIITM /ReachIITM /iitmadras Faculty Co-ordinators BS in Electronic Systems Dr Sankaran Aniruddhan Dr Sankaran Aniruddhan is Associate Professor in the VLSI group of the department of Electrical Engineering
                                at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. He obtained his B. Tech. degree in Electrical Engineering from IIT
                                Madras in 2000, and Ph.D. degree from the University of Washington, Seattle in 2006. Between 2006 and 2011,
                                he worked in the RF-Analog group at Qualcomm Inc., San Diego where he designed integrated circuits for
                                Cellular RF applications. His research primarily focuses on CMOS RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless
                                Communications. Visit website Dr Boby George Dr. Boby George received the M. Tech. and Ph. D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras. He is a
                                Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Madras. His research areas include Sensor
                                Interface Electronics, Electric and Magnetic field Based Sensors and their Applications, Sensor Systems for
                                Water Quality and Quantity Monitoring, and Biomedical Instrumentation. He also serves as Associate Editor
                                for IEEE Sensors Journal, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, and IEEE Transactions on
                                Industrial Electronics
 
Overall Structure The program comprises three levels and a learner has to successfully complete all three levels to get the BS Degree
                        from IIT Madras. There is flexibility to exit at any level. Depending on the courses completed and credits earned, the learner can
                        receive a Foundation Certificate from IITM CODE (Centre for Outreach and Digital Education) or Diploma from IIT
                        Madras or BS Degree in Electronic Systems from IIT Madras. Courses and Credits in Each Level: Foundation Level: 44 credits | 9 theory + 1 lab course Diploma Level: 42 credits | 8 theory + 2 lab course BS Degree Level: 56 credits | 12 courses + Apprenticeship (optional) Semester system Two semesters per year which includes 12 weeks of coursework (video lectures and assignments), 2 in-person invigilated Quizzes and End Semester Exams . Depending on the course,
                                        assessments may include programming exams, mini projects, vivas, take home assignments, etc. Credits required to be earned to exit with: Foundation Certificate in Electronic Systems : 44 credits Diploma in Electronic Systems : 86 credits BS Degree in Electronic Systems : 142 credits Completion time for the BS degree: 4 - 8 years Time period is based on the learner’s preferred pace and performance in assessments. Expected
                                        learner engagement will be approximately 10 hours/course/week . Fees: Pay only for courses you register in each semester! Refer Fee Structure . Online Courses & Assignments: Duration of each course: 12 weeks - Each week comprises 2-3 hours of videos, practice questions, text
                                    transcripts, and graded assignments - everything made available online. Quizzes and Exams: In-person invigilated quizzes and exams for all courses. Additional assessments as per the grading
                                    pattern defined for each course. Lab Exercises: Some of the courses of the programme are accompanied by lab sessions. The lab sessions will be conducted
                                    at IIT Madras Campus every semester. Some lab sessions may be done online or can be handled through kits
                                    that will be suggested and can be purchased by students. Course Registrations In each semester, a learner may register for a maximum of four theory courses depending on the time they can
                        dedicate to the program. A student doing this program full time is recommended to take 4 per semester while working
                        professionals and students pursuing any other academic program can take 2 or 3 courses. Assessments There are 3 types of assessments for each course: Weekly Assignments which are online monthly in-person Quizzes in-person End Term Exam Some of the courses are accompanied by lab sessions to be done at home with the use of electronic kits as
                            suggested. It is mandatory that students travel to IIT Madras campus to demonstrate the lab experiments
                            specified. In addition, assessments may include programming exams, mini projects, vivas, take home assignments, etc. Exam Cities The Invigilated Quizzes and End Semester exams are conducted in a number of cities spread across India. Exams are also conducted in centres in some countries such as UAE, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Singapore and Sri
                                Lanka if there are enough students in these places. Learners based out of other countries will be allowed to
                                take up remote proctored exams. Additional Exam Fee will apply for all learners opting to write exams
                                outside India. The map shows our current Exam Cities List. View List If you reside outside India and cannot find a centre in your city / country, please write to
                                ge-es@study.iitm.ac.in for assistance. Exam Cities List Bahrain Manama Kuwait Salmiya Oman Muscat Singapore Singapore Sri Lanka Colombo Jaffna UAE Dubai Hamdan (AUH) Sharjah Andaman And Nicobar Islands Port Blair Andhra Pradesh Anantapur Bhimavaram Guntur Kadapa Kurnool Rajahmundry Tirupathi Vijayawada Vishakhapatnam Arunachal Pradesh Naharlagun Assam Dibrugarh Guwahati Silchar Tezpur Bihar Patna Bhagalpur Gaya Muzaffarpur Darbhanga Chhattisgarh Raipur Delhi Delhi Goa Panaji Gujarat Ahmedabad Anand Rajkot Surat Vadodara Haryana Faridabad Gurgaon Kurukshetra Himachal Pradesh Hamirpur Shimla Jammu and Kashmir Jammu Srinagar Jharkhand Dhanbad Jamshedpur Ranchi Karnataka Belgaum Bengaluru Dharwad Gulbarga Mangalore Mysore Kerala Calicut Ernakulam Kollam Kottayam Palakkad Thrissur Trivandrum Madhya Pradesh Bhopal Gwalior Indore Jabalpur Maharashtra Amravati Aurangabad Jalgaon Kolhapur Mumbai Nagpur Nanded Nashik Pune Solapur Manipur Imphal Meghalaya Shillong Mizoram Aizawl Nagaland Dimapur Odisha Bhubaneswar Rourkela Sambalpur Puducherry Puducherry Punjab Chandigarh Jalandhar Ludhiana Amritsar Rajasthan Jaipur Jodhpur Kota Udaipur Sikkim Bardang Tamil Nadu Chennai-Avadi Chennai-South Coimbatore Erode Kanchipuram Madurai Salem Thanjavur Tiruchirappalli Tirunelveli Vellore Telangana Hyderabad Warangal Tripura Agartala Uttar Pradesh Agra Allahabad Ghaziabad Gorakhpur Greater Noida Kanpur Lucknow Meerut Varanasi Uttarakhand Dehradun Haldwani Roorkee West Bengal Aasansol Adisaptagram Durgapur Kolkata Siliguri Close Fee Structure (Tentative, to be finalised) Level Fee per credit Number of credits Fees to be paid at each level (For general category students)* Total fees to Earn the Foundation, Diploma & BS degree Foundation Rs. 1000 8 Rs. 8,000 Rs. 80,000 Rs. 2000 36 Rs. 72,000 Diploma Rs. 4000 42 Rs. 1,68,000 Rs. 2,48,000 BS in Electronic Systems Rs. 6000 56 Rs. 3,36,000 Rs. 5,84,000 *Fee waiver is not be applicable for the International students. Fee waivers depend on category of learner and family income. Category of student Institution fee advance SC or ST or PwD with >40% disability certificate 50% EWS or OBC-NCL category with annual family income between 1-5 LPA 50% SC or ST and PwD with >40% disability certificate 75% SC or ST or PwD with >40% disability certificate or EWS or OBC-NCL category AND annual family income
                                        less than 1 LPA 75% For candidates who are outside India and studying in the program: For candidates writing exams overseas,
                            there will be facilitation fee for exams in addition to the above. The fee will be revisited periodically and
                            revised if necessary. The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of the candidate, the
                            income of his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her siblings and children below the age of 18
                            years. Family income certificate is not required while applying for the Degree program, but will be required to
                                avail fee weiver when joining the program. Download Family Income Certificate format OBC-NCL / EWS certificate, if applicable, need to be obtained in following format while applying: Download OBC-NCL Certificate format Download EWS Certificate format Foundation Level These courses have been chosen to ensure that the learner who passes these successfully is well prepared to proceed to
                    the Diploma level courses. Requirements for registration Without JEE: The learner should apply for and clear the Qualifier Exam. With JEE: A student who has qualified for JEE Advanced 2023 is automatically eligible for admission and
                            can register for courses in the foundation level of the BS program. Exit Learners have the following two options when they successfully complete all 10 Foundation level courses: Exit: The learner may exit with a Foundational Certificate from Centre
                                for Outreach and Digital Education (CODE), IIT Madras. Proceed to next level : The learner can join the Diploma Level . 10 courses 44 credits 1 - 3 years 10 hrs/course/week ₹80,000* *Refer Fee Structure Courses Foundation level comprises the following: Course Name Credits Code Prerequisites Corequisites English I 4 HS1101 None None Math for Electronics I 4 MA1101 None None Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits 4 EE1101 None None Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits Lab 1 EE1104 None None Introduction to C Programming 2+3 CS1101 None None English II 4 HS1102 HS1101 None Introduction to the Linux Shell 5 CS1102 None CS1101 Digital Systems 4 EE1102 EE1101 None Electrical and Electronic Circuits 4 EE1103 MA1101 & EE1101 None Electronics Laboratory 3 EE1105 None EE1103 Embedded C Programming 4+2 CS2101 CS1102 Lab Diploma Level The Diploma level comprises 10 courses (after the Foundation level). Students should complete 20 courses (which includes the
                10 Foundation level courses) and earn 86 credits in total to get the Diploma. Requirements for registration Only those students who complete courses of the first two semesters will be permitted to proceed with registration
                        of courses in the Diploma level. Exit Learners have the following options based on the courses completed in this level: Option 1: If a learner has completed all the courses and labs in Foundation
                            level and Diploma, they can proceed to the B.S Degree Level. Option 2: They may exit with a Diploma in Electronic Systems from IIT
                            Madras. 10 courses 42 credits 1 - 3 years 10 hrs/course/week ₹1,68,000* *Refer Fee Structure Courses Diploma level comprises the following: Course Name Credits Code Prerequisites Corequisites Math for Electronics II 4 MA2101 MA1101 None Signals and Systems 4+1 EE2101 EE1103 None Analog Electronic Systems 4 EE2102 EE2101 MA2101 Analog Electronics Lab 3 EE2104 None EE2102 Python programming 5 CS2102 None None Digital System Design 4+2 EE2103 EE1102 None Digital Signal Processing 4+1 EE3101 EE2101 None Embedded Linux on System on Programmable Chips 2+2 EE3102 CS2101 & EE2103 None Sensors and Applications 3 EE3103 EE2102 None Sensors Lab 3 EE3104 None EE3103 BS Degree Level The BS level comprises 12 courses and one optional Apprenticeship. Students should earn a total of 142 credits through
                    all levels to get the BS Degree. Requirements for registration Only those students who complete courses of 1st FOUR Semesters will be permitted to register for courses in
                            Degree level. Exit Once the learner successfully completes 142 credits and the course requirements, they will be awarded a BS
                            Degree in Electronic Systems from IIT Madras. 12 courses 56 credits 1 - 3 years 10 hrs/course/week ₹3,36,000* *Refer Fee Structure Courses Degree level comprises the following: Course Name Credits Code Prerequisites Corequisites Elective I 4 - - - Electromagnetic Fields and Transmission Lines 4 EE3105 MA2101 None Electronic Product Design 4 EE3107 EE3103 & EE3105 None Control Engineering 4 EE3106 EE2101 None Elective II 4 - - - Elective III 4 - - - Elective IV 4 - - - Open Elective 4 - - - Open Elective 4 - - - Open Elective 4 - - - Open Elective 4 - - - Apprenticeship (optional) 8 - - - Humanities Elective 4 - - - Sample Certificates BS Degree in Electronic Systems Diploma in Electronic Systems Foundation in Electronic Systems  Honour Code
 
Mandatory Requirements to Enroll and Learn Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop/desktop device will be a key requirement
                        to learn
                        effectively from our courses. For a complete list of software and hardware requirements, please
                        refer to this
                        document - Mandatory
                            System Specifications . Learner should be able to travel to assigned exam centres for quizzes and exams, each term.
                        Check the list of exam
                            cities where our exam centres are currently located. Kit: Some of the courses are accompanied by lab sessions to be done at home with the use of
                        electronic kits as
                        suggested. The cost of the kit will be communicated and updated in the student handbook. It is mandatory that students travel to IIT Madras campus to demonstrate the lab experiments
                            specified and
                            complete the lab exams in person at the campus. These are planned currently in the months of May-July and November-January and can change based
                        on other
                        constraints. The tentative duration for the in person component at IIT Madras is expected to be
                        one week every
                        semester. Hostel accommodation is not guaranteed and students must make their own travel and
                        accommodation
                        arrangements for the same. The charges for this must be borne by the student. Eligibility to Apply Anyone who has passed Class 12 or equivalent with Physics and Mathematics can apply irrespective
                        of age. View list of accepted class 12 equivalents. School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams can apply. Those who qualify
                        can join the
                        program after passing Class 12. The committee approved that students who have passed Maths and Physics separately through
                        NIOS or any other equivalent organization be permitted to apply to the BS in Electronic Systems
                        program, having fulfilled the minimum eligibility requirement. Accepted Class 12
                                    equivalents 1. A Diploma recognised by AICTE or a state board of technical education of at least
                                    3 year
                                    duration. 2. Any Public School / Board / University examination in India or in any foreign
                                    country recognised
                                    as equivalent to the 10+2 system by the Association of Indian Universities
                                    (AIU). 3. Final examination of the two-year course of the Joint Services Wing of the
                                    National Defence
                                    Academy. 4. General Certificate Education (GCE) examination (London / Cambridge / Sri Lanka)
                                    at the Advanced
                                    (A) level. 5. High School Certificate Examination of the Cambridge University or International
                                    Baccalaureate
                                    Diploma of the International Baccalaureate Office, Geneva. 6. Higher Secondary Certificate vocational examination. 7. Intermediate or two-year Pre-University examination conducted by a recognised
                                    Board /
                                    University. 8. Senior Secondary School Examination conducted by the National Institute of Open
                                    Schooling with a
                                    minimum of five subjects. Close Application Process Applications for the batch starting January 2024 is now open. Apply
                            Now Anyone who is eligible may start applying by filling in a simple application form and paying the
                        application
                        fee. Category of applicant Application fee General Category / OBC / EWS Applicant ₹6000 application fee SC / ST / PwD (>= 40% disablity ) Applicant ₹3000 application fee SC / ST Applicant who is ALSO PwD (>= 40%
                                    disablity ) ₹1500 application fee An additional exam facilitation fee will apply for learners opting to write the Qualifier Exam
                        in an Exam Centre
                        outside India. Application will be considered only when, after payment, applicant also fills in further details
                        and submits required documents for verification. Applications without details & documents, even if paid, will not be considered
                        valid. Admission to the Foundation Level Regular entry: All eligible candidates, irrespective of their backgrounds, can earn
                        admission to the
                        Foundation Level by successfully completing the qualifier process. See details below JEE-based entry: A student who has qualified for JEE Advanced 2023 is automatically
                        eligible for
                        admission and can register for courses in the foundation level of the BS program. See details below Regular Entry All regular entry applicants must go through the Qualifier Process to earn admission to the
                        Foundation Level. Qualifier Preparation: The qualifier process includes four weeks of coursework based on
                        lecture videos,
                        assignments, and live sessions of the four foundational level courses - English I, Math for
                        Electronics I,
                        Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits, and Introduction to C Programming - that will be
                        provided through our
                        online portal. Every week an assignment must be submitted for grading in each course. Qualifier Exam: At the end of the 4 weeks, a qualifier exam will be conducted for
                        eligible candidates
                        based on the content covered in the 4 weeks of study. Eligibility to appear for the qualifier exam (regular entry): In each course, the average of the best 2 out of the first 3 assignment scores will be
                        calculated. Only those
                        who get the minimum required average assignment scores in all four courses (as given below) will
                        be allowed to
                        appear for the Qualifier Exam. Minimum Average Assignment Score required in each course General Learner 40% SC / ST / PwD with 40% disability 30% PwD with 40% disability & SC / ST 30% OBC-NCL / EWS 35% Note: Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various categories of learners is applicable
                            ONLY for the
                            qualifier process. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass criteria once
                            registered into the
                            program. Qualifier Exam and Passing Criteria (regular entry): Only learners who are eligible to appear for the qualifier exam will receive the hall
                        ticket for it. The in-person Qualifier Exam at the end of 4 weeks of coursework is of 4 hours duration and
                        covers all 4
                        courses. To pass the Qualifier Exam , the learner has to get a minimum Average Qualifier Exam
                            Score and a minimum Qualifier Exam Score in each course individually . Refer table: Min. Req. Qualifier Exam Score in each course Min. Req. Average Qualifier Exam Score General Learner 40% 50% SC / ST / PwD with 40% disability 30% 40% PwD with 40% disability & SC / ST 30% 40% OBC-NCL / EWS 35% 45% Note: Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various categories of learners is applicable
                            ONLY for the
                            qualifier process. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass criteria once
                            registered into the
                            program. Only those who pass the Qualifier Exam will be eligible to register for the Foundation Level
                        courses. Validity of the Qualifier Exam result: For candidates who have already
                        cleared class 12
                        board exams, the qualifier marks will be valid for the two semesters that come after the
                        qualifier exam date
                        (the continuing semester and the next one) for the learner to register to the Foundation level. For students who attempt the
                        qualifier exam while in school, doing their std XII, the qualifier marks
                        will be valid for four semesters to continue with the foundation level. Though everyone who passes the Qualifier Exam will be allowed to register for Foundation Level,
                        there will be
                        limitations on the number of courses a learner will be allowed to register for in their first
                        term based on the
                        Average Qualifier Exam Score (M). Average Qualifier Exam Score (M) Number of courses allowed to register for Minimum required <= M < 50% up to 2 courses 50% <= M < 70% up to 3 courses M >= 70% up to 4 courses Re-attempt Qualifier Exam (regular entry) Learners who were eligible to appear for the qualifier exam, but did not clear the qualifier exam or were
                            absent for it , will be eligible to re-attempt the qualifier exam in the same term (refer important dates ) without having to repeat the assignments. Anyone who is eligible may apply by filling in the re-attempt application form that opens up
                        immediately after
                        the qualifier results are announced and paying the re-attempt fee. General Category / OBC-NCL / EWS Applicant ₹2000 re-attempt fee SC / ST Category / PwD (>= 40% disablity )
                                    Applicant ₹1000 re-attempt fee SC / ST Category Applicant who is ALSO PwD (>= 40% disablity ) ₹500 re-attempt fee For candidates who have not passed the first attempt and reattempt within the same semester, the
                        best of the two
                        scores in each subject of the qualifier exam will be considered for deciding the result of the
                        Qualifier exam. If an applicant was not eligible to receive the hall ticket for the qualifier exam in the first
                        attempt: (1) They can only attempt in the next semester and have to apply as a fresh candidate, paying
                        the full fees as
                        per the fee norms applicable (and in case of candidates outside India, an additional exam
                        facilitation fee to be
                        paid) (2) They will have to redo the four weeks of course work and weekly graded assignments and
                        become eligible to
                        get the hall ticket for the qualifier exam JEE-based Entry Candidates who have qualified to attempt JEE Advanced in the current year are deemed to have
                        directly qualified
                        and can register for courses in the Foundation level and start the program. Such students will first register to the program paying the registration fees of Rs 6000/- with
                        suitable waivers
                        for students in the category of SC/ST/PwD with >40% disability and then once the documents are
                        verified and
                        their registration is approved, they will proceed to pay the fees for courses they choose to
                        register for. The registration of students, applying through this category, who do not appear for Quiz 1 AND
                        Quiz 2 in the
                        first semester will stand canceled. International Students Are you a learner outside India interested to join this program? This program is open to learners from all around the globe. You can study from IIT Madras and
                        earn the BS in
                        Electronic Systems irrespective of the country you are from. IIT Madras is setting up modalities to conduct in-person exams in as many countries as possible.
                        Currently, we
                        conduct in-person exams in the following cities outside India: UAE - Dubai, Sharjah, Abu Dhabi Sri Lanka - Colombo, Jaffna Bahrain -
                            Manama Kuwait
                            - Salmiya Oman - Muscat Students residing in these countries must write exams in the designated exam centres. Students
                        have to appear
                        for in-person exams roughly once a month. Learners residing in any other country, apart from those shown above, can also enroll for this
                        program and
                        appear for remote proctored exams. If you have any queries, please write to
                        ge-es@study.iitm.ac.in and our team
                        will get in touch with you and guide you on the next steps. Please note that all lab courses are to be done in person at IIT Madras campus atleast twice a
                        year and you will
                        have to travel for this. Required Documents to apply 1. Passport size photograph (JPEG / JPG format) 50KB-150KB 2. Signature (JPEG / JPEG format) 4KB-150KB 3. Photo ID Card Scan - Aadhar Card / PAN Card / Passport / Voter ID / Driving License /
                                other
                                Government ID with photo (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 4. Category Certificate - only for applicants who select SC / ST / OBC-NCL* / EWS (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 5. PwD Certificate - only for applicants with 40% or more disability (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 6. Proof of applicant having been permanently disabled OR parent having been permanently
                                disable /
                                killed during war or peacetime operations while serving as a defence / paramilitary
                                personnel. - if
                                applicable (JPEG / JPG / PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. 7. Only for those applying to join via JEE-based entry: Scoresheet / admit card /
                                registration receipt
                                as proof of eligibility to write JEE Advanced (PDF format) - 50KB to 2MB file size. *Note that BC / OBC certificate is not the same as OBC-NCL (Other Backward Caste - Non
                                Creamy Layer)
                                certificate. Only applicants belonging to OBC caste as listed in Central Government’s
                                www.ncbc.nic.in
                                website and also belonging to Non Creamy Layer may apply in the “OBC-NCL” category.
                                Other BC / OBC
                                applicants must apply in the “General” category. Download OBC-NCL Certificate format Download EWS Certificate format Okay  Honour
                            Code
 
Text from file: C:\Users\Harsh Singh\Downloads\study-iitm-website\www\es\faq.html
Frequently Asked Questions - IIT Madras Degree Program English | हिंदी | தமிழ் | తెలుగు | മലയാളം | ಕನ್ನಡ | मराठी| ગુજરાતી | বাংলা Academics Overall Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundation Level Diploma Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calender Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students Testimonials FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us SIGN IN Applications open now for May 2024 Batch. Application Close: May 28th, 2024 | Exam: Jul 07th, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications open now for May 2024 Batch. Application Close: May 26th, 2024 | Exam: Jul 07th,
                        2024 APPLY NOW Home FAQ Frequently Asked Questions all General Academics Application Admission Fees Foundation Level Does IIT Madras offer BS in Electronic Systems
                        on-campus? Does IIT Madras offer BS in Electronic Systems on-campus? No. IIT Madras does not offer BS in Electronic Systems on-campus. This is a non-campus program
                        only. Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities? Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities? Due to limitations of campus facilities and students being spread out geographically, learners
                        enrolled in the
                        program will not have access to IITM campus facilities. What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional
                        languages? What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional
                        languages? All our program courses are taught in English. Hence, we expect a minimum proficiency in English
                        language to
                        participate in the program. How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? This BS degree is a 4 year program. On an average, we anticipate that a learner studying part
                        time will finish
                        the degree in 4 to 8 years. Check Acadmics page to better understand the program structure. What are the technological requirements for this
                        program? What are the technological requirements for this program? Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop / desktop device are necessary.
                        Familiarity with Google
                        tools would be an advantage. Students will have to procure lab kits and work on them, the
                        details of which will
                        be communicated soon. Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction? Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction? No. Students will have to study through pre-recorded video lessons which will be made available
                        on our portal. One or two live sessions per course will be conducted to clear doubts and interact with the
                        course instructor
                        and course support team. What is the overall structure of the program? What
                        are Levels? What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? The program is split into three levels that have to be done strictly in sequence: 1: Foundational Level (9 courses + 1 Lab) - 44 Credits 2: Diploma Level (8 Courses + 2 Labs) - (44+ 42) = 86 Credits 3: Degree Level (12 courses) + Apprenticeship (Optional) - (44+42+56) = 142 Credits Check Overall Structure in Academics page. How much time do I need to spend on a course per
                        week? How much time do I need to spend on a course per week? The expected effort is about 8-10 hours per week per course. How many courses can I complete in a year? How many courses can I complete
                        in a year? There are two semesters in a year. Learners will be allowed to register for a maximum of four
                        theory courses in
                        a semester depending on their preferred pace of learning. Note that registration for any course
                        requires that
                        the prerequisite courses for this should be completed. How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? Each course page will have a discussion forum where learners can raise their course-related
                        questions and
                        interact with the course instructor or course support team. For all questions not related to the course, you may write to support-es@study.iitm.ac.in Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM BS Degree Program? Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM BS Degree Program? There are NO official WhatsApp or Telegram groups. We currently answer all questions / doubts
                        via support email
                        / calls. We will use whatsapp from our side to send you messages and reminders. I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? Please send us your registered email ID and a screenshot of the error / issue with relevant
                        description to
                        support-es@study.iitm.ac.in If the error is after payment has been made, please forward the confirmation email from Razorpay
                        along with
                        email ID, application number and screenshot with description. Is there an attendance policy for this program? Is there an attendance policy for this program? There is no daily attendance, but once you register for the courses, submission of weekly
                        assignment is taken as
                        an attendance indicator. Minimum required scores in weekly assignments of a course will
                        determine if a learner
                        will be allowed to write the end term exam for that course or not. Can I take my exams from home? Can I take my exams from home? No. Every semester will have two quizzes and an end semester exam for each course. All quizzes
                        and end semesters
                        exams will be in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across the country. You need to
                        travel to the
                        exam centre and take these exams. Check Exam Cities in Academics Page. What is a quiz? What is a quiz? A quiz is similar or equivalent to a monthly test in schools and colleges. Marks obtained in
                        quizzes count
                        towards the total score obtained in the course. All quizzes will be in-person, invigilated exams
                        at designated
                        centres across the country. Are the exam dates flexible? Are the exam dates flexible? No, the exam dates are not flexible. The quiz and end semesters exam dates are fixed for all
                        learners taking the
                        same course in a semester. We try our best to schedule all exams during the weekends though it
                        may not be
                        possible for every exam. What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? If the city of your choice is not in our current exam cities list, please send an email to
                        support-es@study.iitm.ac.in. We will consider your request, but there is no guarantee that we
                        will add it. Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many? Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many? There may be more than one exam centre in any exam city. The count depends on the number of
                        learners in each
                        city and availability of centres on given date with our exam partner. When will the Semester start? What is the timeline? When will the Semester start? What is the timeline? The semester will start after the Qualifier process. Those who are successful in the Qualifier
                        Exam can join the
                        program by registering for the Foundational level courses in September 2023. Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? You can exit with Diploma in Electronic Systems. However, please note that there is no direct
                        entry to Diploma.
                        You will have to do Foundation level courses also, before taking up Diploma. What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? Check Eligibility section in Admissions page for the latest update of the eligibility criteria. Is the program available to students currently in class 11th standard? Is the program available to students currently in class 11th standard? School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams can apply and go through the
                        qualifier phase
                        but will not be allowed to register for courses of the program until they clear class 12 (or
                        equivalent). Note
                        that a Qualifier Exam result is valid only for 2 semester (about 1 year) right after the exam. I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? Yes, you can apply for the program if you have cleared class 12 or equivalent with Physics and
                        Mathematics. I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? Yes. If you cleared class 12 or equivalent in 2023 or earlier with Mathematics and Physics, you
                        can apply. There
                        is no requirement to have completed a degree program. How and where can I apply for the program? How and where can I apply for
                        the program? Anyone who is eligible may apply by visiting our website https://study.iitm.ac.in/es/ and
                        clicking "APPLY NOW"
                        and filling in the application form, paying the application fee and uploading required
                        documents. We recommend that you go through the Academics page and Admissions page to better understand the
                        program and the
                        admission process before applying. What is the qualifier process? What is the qualifier process? All applicants will have to go through a Qualifier Process, wherein they will get access to 4
                        weeks of content
                        of the four foundational level courses. Applicants must go through this qualifier content and
                        submit assignment.
                        Eligible applicants are given the hall ticket to the qualifier exam. which is conducted on 6th
                        August 2023 Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam?
                        What is the passing
                        criteria? Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam?
                        What is the passing
                        criteria? No. Only the learners who get the minimum required marks in the online assignments during the
                        qualifier process
                        of 4 weeks will allowed to attend the qualifier exam. Only those learners allowed to write the
                        qualifier exam
                        shall be provided with hall tickets. Refer to Qualifier Process and the section below it to learn about the minimum required marks in the qualifier assignments
                        and minimum
                        required marks to pass / clear the qualifier exam. How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later semester if I
                        clear the
                        qualifier exam now? How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later semester if I
                        clear the
                        qualifier exam now? The Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 2 semester (or 1
                        year). How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? Currently it is 2 application cycles a year. What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? The list of required documents is available on the Application Process section of the admissions page. Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or
                        university (like on the
                        NPTEL platform)? Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or
                        university (like on the
                        NPTEL platform)? IITM's BS Degree in Electronic System is a stand alone program. Credits cannot be transferred. Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier? Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier? No, the course content will be provided only in online mode so you can watch them anytime,
                        anywhere. There will
                        be no hard copy provided. Depending on the course, learners may be recommended reference books /
                        material that
                        they may buy separately. What OBC-NCL / EWS certificates should we submit while applying or registering for courses? What OBC-NCL / EWS certificates should we submit while applying or registering for courses? Student has to submit valid certificates while applying / registering. These will be verified by
                        our team. An
                        approved certificate will be valid for two semester. Certificates that are outdated will not be
                        accepted. After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if
                        I fail the
                        qualifier exam? After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if
                        I fail the
                        qualifier exam? No. There will be no refund of application fee once paid. After registering for a course in a semester, can I carry over the fees to the next semester if
                        I am not able to
                        complete the course? After registering for a course in a semester, can I carry over the fees to the next semester if
                        I am not able to
                        complete the course? No. A course registration is valid only for one semester. If a learner is not able to clear a
                        course in a
                        semester, they will be considered as having failed the course and will need to register for the
                        course again at
                        a later semester along with the required fee. What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? The overall program fees need not be paid at one stretch. The fees will be collected in each
                        semester based on
                        the number of courses you register for the respective semester. So, if you register for 2
                        courses in a semester,
                        you have to pay the fees only for those 2 courses. For more details, please refer to the Fee Structure in Academics Page. What is the mode of payment? What is the mode of payment? Fees can be paid only through online mode. Fees through DD will not be accepted. Note that payment cannot be made using a Debit Card. You can pay using any Credit Card,
                        Netbanking (all Indian
                        Banks), Wallet, UPI (Google Pay, BHIM, etc.). Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of
                        fee? Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Yes. After successful completion of payment, you will receive a confirmation email from
                        Razorpay. If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? In case of failed payments, it will take 3 to 4 weeks for the money to be credited back in your
                        bank account. Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Your application form will be considered as submitted only upon making the application fee
                        payment. Until then,
                        you may edit the contents of your application form. After the application fee has been paid, you
                        will not be
                        allowed to edit the application form. In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will be
                        given a chance to
                        re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my
                        application to be
                        verified? My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my
                        application to be
                        verified? Verification of documents may take upto 3 weeks. Please be patient. We will keep you updated
                        about your
                        application status by email and on the dashboard. How to avoid getting my application "returned /
                        rejected"? How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? After you submit your application, we verify the same before changing the status of uploaded
                        document(s) to
                        "accepted" or "returned / rejected". Be careful when filling the application form and double check the information you enter. We
                        verify the files /
                        documents you have uploaded (photograph, signature, ID card, SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD
                        document if
                        applicable). If any of the files / documents uploaded is unclear or broken or found to be wrong
                        or incorrect,
                        your application may be "returned / rejected". In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will be
                        given a chance to
                        re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. Being honest and careful while filling the application form and uploading correct documents in
                        the correct
                        formats will help get your application "accepted". Check Application Process for required documents, document formats and sizes. Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? No. You will need to pick two different preferences for exam cities in the order of your
                        preference. Your exam
                        centre shall be allotted in any one of the two exam cities picked depending on availability. We
                        recommend that
                        you familiarize with the currently available Exam City options to be able to pick your preferred exam cities. Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my
                        application? Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my
                        application? You will be allowed to change your exam city for any exam till 4 weeks before the exam date. Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed
                        for all the
                        later exams? Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed
                        for all the
                        later exams? No. The Exam city preferences selected in the application form is for the Qualifier Exam only.
                        You will have the
                        option of picking a different set of Exam City options for each quiz and the final exam. Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? We are trying to see if this is possible. Please watch out for announcements regarding
                        scholarships / loans. Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS /PwD candidates will have concession in minimum scores required during
                        the qualifier
                        process to enter the program. Check out Fee Structure in Academics page. Note that there will be no such concessions after entering the program. (OBC
                        candidates not
                        belonging to the OBC-NCL category cannot avail any concession) Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower
                        family income? Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower
                        family income? Only SC / ST / PwD candidates may avail fee waivers in the application stage. After clearing the
                        qualifier
                        process and exam, candidates belonging to any category (General / OBC / EWS / SC / ST / PwD) may
                        avail fee
                        waivers in course fees based on family income. Check Fee Structure in Academics page for details. What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of the
                        candidate, the income
                        of his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her siblings and children below the age of
                        18 years. After clearing the Qualifier Exam, all learners who wish to avail fee waivers based on Family
                        Income are
                        required to submit Family Income Certificate in the format provided in the Fee Structure section. Note that the Family Income Certificates are valid only for one year and will need to
                        be submitted
                        afresh each year to continue availing fee waiver based on Family Income through the
                        program. I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income is below
                        5 lakhs per
                        annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income is below
                        5 lakhs per
                        annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? Economically Weaker Section (EWS) in India, as defined by the Govt. of India, is a sub-category
                        of people
                        belonging to the General category with an annual family income less than ₹8 lakhs per annum and
                        who do not
                        belong to any category such as SC/ST/OBC. Course fee waivers from IIT Madras are available for
                        general category
                        learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum. As per the policy of IIT Madras, and
                        as part of our
                        documentation process to ensure that we give fee waiver benefits to the deserving learners, we
                        require general
                        category learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum to submit both EWS certificate
                        and Family
                        Income certificate. EWS and Family Income certificates will need to be obtained in the format
                        mentioned in the Fee Structure section in Academics page. Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT
                        Madras? Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT
                        Madras? We will try to make internship / recruitment opportunities available to learners; we will notify
                        learners when
                        the opportunities arise. How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? A large number of learners apply and participate in the qualifier process. After clearing the
                        qualifier process,
                        learners will need to clear foundational level courses, diploma level courses and then the
                        degree level courses
                        to finally get a BS degree from IIT Madras. That's a total of 142 course credits. When a student
                        is able to
                        successfully clear these courses and fulfill all the academic requirements, we are confident
                        that the students
                        will be employable. Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BS Degree? Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BS Degree? The demand for skilled individuals in Electronic Systesm is high. Through our program, we do our
                        best to equip
                        our learners with required subject expertise. We are also planning to give soft skills training
                        as part of the
                        program. It is all about enabling IITM BS graduates with the right job opportunities. IIT Madras
                        will actively
                        reach out to the recruiters in the context of placement opportunities for the graduates of the
                        BS Degree
                        Program. What is the registration process for the
                        Foundational Level? What is the registration process for the Foundational Level? Once you clear the Qualifier Exam, you will be allowed to access the Course Registration Form
                        from your
                        dashboard upon logging in. In the Course Registration Form, you will need to fill in the
                        required details,
                        upload necessary documents and pay the course fee to register for the first semester of your
                        Foundational Level.
                        You may choose to register for one or more Foundational Level courses with the upper limit of
                        four courses. Note that there will be an added Exam Fee applicable for learners opting to write their quizzes
                        and end semester
                        exams outside India. What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the
                        Foundational Level? What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the
                        Foundational Level? It is mandatory to upload 12th or equivalent mark sheet. In addition, any one of these documents
                        while
                        registering for Foundational Level are required: - Degree Certificate OR - Certificate of the highest level of education What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later? What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later? Please refer to the Fee Structure section in the Academics page to see which fee waiver may be applicable to you and the relevant
                        documents /
                        certificates that will need to be submitted. I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I
                        need to submit
                        them again while registering for the Foundational Level? I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I
                        need to submit
                        them again while registering for the Foundational Level? No, not required to submit again. However, the EWS / OBC-NCL certificate need to be submitted
                        again if the
                        previously submitted certificate is not valid until the end of the current financial year. I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any
                        fee waiver
                        category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any
                        fee waiver
                        category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? Please be informed that you will not be paying the entire Program fee or Foundational Level fee
                        at one stretch.
                        The actual fees you will be paying will be in proportion to the number of courses you register
                        for in every
                        semester. So, if you register for 2 courses in the July 2023 semester, you have to pay the
                        course fees only for
                        those 2 courses. In the Fee Structure section, select your goal to be able to see a detailed PDF with breakdown of course fee over
                        each semester. Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? The personal email ID you applied for the program with cannot be changed. This email ID is used
                        to access the
                        whole Qualifier Process and the Foundational Level Course Registration Form. Once an applicant passes the qualifier exam and registers to courses, they will be assigned a
                        roll number and a
                        corresponding official IIT Madras BS Degree student email ID. After that, all further
                        communication and course
                        access will be through the official student email ID. Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? No, the current portal will be used for all the Levels. You will be given a new official IITM BS
                        Degree student
                        email ID to access the portal. Will I be issued an ID card? Will I be issued an ID card? An ID card in electronic format will be provided, subject to conditions on use of the ID card. Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level? Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level? The BS Degree has to be completed within a maximum period of 8 years. While a 1 or 2 year break between Levels is allowed, we recommend that you time the length of
                        your breaks
                        depending on whether you want to pursue a Diploma or Degree, and how many courses you are able
                        to take up in a
                        Semester. I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier
                        Exam. What will
                        be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier
                        Exam. What will
                        be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? You can re-apply again for the immediate next Qualifier exam in the same term at half the
                        original fee paid by
                        you. Your previous assignment scores will be considered and you will be directly eligible to
                        write the Qualifier
                        Exam-attempt 2 without having to submit assignments again. I applied for the Qualifer process but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment
                        scores to be
                        eligible to take the Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What
                        will be the
                        procedure to re-apply? I applied for the Qualifer process but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment
                        scores to be
                        eligible to take the Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What
                        will be the
                        procedure to re-apply? You have to re-apply as a new applicant with payment of full
                        application fee. What is the eligiblity to write the End Semester Exam for a course? What is the eligiblity to write the End Semester Exam for a course? To be eligible to write the End Semester Exam for a course, it is mandatory for the learner to
                        (i) obtain an
                        Average Assignment Score >= 40/100 AND (ii) appear for at least one out of the two proctored
                        in-person Quizzes. Every course might have additional eligibility conditions to write the end-sem exam and obtain
                        the course grade.
                        Please check the grading document for details on this. Learners who are not eligible to write a specific course's End Semester Exam will not be issued
                        hall ticket for
                        the same. They will have to repeat the entire course including assignments and quizzes in a
                        later Semester. Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person
                        Quizzes? Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes? It is mandatory to attempt at least one of the proctored in-person quizzes in a Semester to be
                        eligible to
                        appear for the End Semester Exams. The quizzes contribute to the final course score and the
                        course grade and
                        hence it is recommended that students attempt both quizzes and all other assessments in the
                        course. Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End
                        Semester? Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End
                        Semester? For the courses you register for in the same semester immediately after clearing your Qualifier
                        Exam, yes, your
                        Qualifier phase assignment scores will be included while calculating eligibility for the End
                        Semester Exam. For courses that you register for in a later Semester, you will be required to repeat the
                        assignments in the
                        course again. Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent Semester? Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent Semester? The Qualifier Exam Score will be counted as Quiz 1 Score for the courses registered in the SAME
                        Semester
                        immediately after the Qualifier exam. They will not be used in any other subsequent semester. What will happen if I am absent for an End Semester
                        Exam? What will happen if I am absent for an End Semester Exam? Learner has two options: 1. Register for the course in the subsequent semester with the option of taking the End Semester
                        Exam alone and
                        by paying a reduced fee. 2. Repeat the entire course (including assignments and quizzes) by paying the full course
                        fee. What is the procedure to add / drop a course? What is the procedure to add / drop a course? Once the registration window closes in any Semester, adding courses will not be allowed.
                        Dropping a course will
                        be allowed within 4 weeks of the Semester start. Is it possible to repeat a course for improving
                        grades? Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades? Though it is not recommended, a learner may choose to repeat a course for improving grades any
                        number of times.
                        The course fee for repeating a course will be twice the regular course fee and the learner will
                        have to submit
                        the online graded weekly assignments, appear for the Quiz(zes) and End Semester Exam. The highest score among all attempts of a course will be used for calculating the CGPA. How can I change the exam city within India? How can I change the exam city within India? Each exam has a deadline before which change of exam city is allowed. Option to change the exam
                        city will be
                        available till each deadline in the student Dashboard, in the "Exam Cities and Hall Tickets"
                        page. Is it mandatory to travel to IIT Madras for the Lab
                        courses? Is it mandatory to travel to IIT Madras for the Lab courses? Yes. It is mandatory that students travel to IIT Madras campus to demonstrate the lab
                        experiments specified and
                        complete the lab exams in person at the campus. During my lab session can I get any accommodation available inside the campus? During my lab session can I get any accommodation available inside the campus? No. You have to make your own arrangements for accommodation during lab sessions and any other
                        logistics will
                        not be borne by IIT Madras. The program team will try and see if this is possible but there is
                        no confirmation
                        that accommodation will be provided. Can I pursue Masters degree after this program? Can I pursue Masters degree after this program? Yes. You can do Masters degree after successfully completing BS in Electronic Systems Is this degree accepted for other universities/
                        outside india? Is this degree accepted for other universities/ outside india? Our Diploma and Degree are official Diploma and Degree of IIT Madras. What type of Job will I get after doing this Foundation/Diploma/ Degree Level? What type of Job will I get after doing this Foundation/Diploma/ Degree Level? Some of the major career options available to students taking this program may include the
                        following job
                        positions in industries such as Automotive, Semiconductor, Defence and so on: Electronic System Designer Embedded System Developer Electronic Hardware Specialist System Testing Engineer If I have passed the JEE Main, Can I get a direct entry opportunity to the Foundation level
                        without appearing
                        Qualifier? If I have passed the JEE Main, Can I get a direct entry opportunity to the Foundation level
                        without appearing
                        Qualifier? Candidates who have qualified to attempt JEE Advanced in the current year 2023 are deemed to
                        have directly
                        qualified to the BS-ES program and can register for a maximum of four courses in the Foundation
                        level and start
                        the program. I am a student of BS in Data Science. Can I join BS ES program also? I am a student of BS in Data Science. Can I join BS ES program also? Currently the BS Electronic Systems program exam dates align with the BS Data Science program.
                        Hence it will not
                        be possible to do both programs together. Program updates, if any, will be communicated and updated on our website. I have not done 12th Class. But I have done 3-year Diploma. Can I join? I have not done 12th Class. But I have done 3-year Diploma. Can I join? Yes. You can join as long as you have studied Physics and Maths in your 3-year Diploma Can we apply for Diploma in ES alone rather than applying for the degree? Can we apply for Diploma in ES alone rather than applying for the degree? No. There is no option to register for diploma alone. However, you have multiple exit options
                        which allows you
                        to exit with diploma Is there any lateral entry for the Diploma students? Is there any lateral entry for the Diploma students? There is no lateral entry for Diploma Do I have to go to coaching center to prepare for Qualifier Exam? Do I have to go to coaching center to prepare for Qualifier Exam? No. You don't have go to coaching center. You can do self-study. It is based on 4-weeks of
                        content that we
                        provide. Can I do M.Tech through gate after completion of BS
                        degree ? Can I do M.Tech through gate after completion of BS degree ? You can do M.Tech, however, you will have to check the eligibility criteria mentioned in that
                        University/
                        Institution you are applying to. Is this degree valid to appear UPSC and SSC or any other Government Exams? Is this degree valid to appear UPSC and SSC or any other Government Exams? Every University sets its own requirements. UPSC and other exams such as State exams decide what
                        degrees they
                        recognize. From the side of IIT Madras we are happy to write to these organizations and entities
                        and inform them
                        that this BS degree from IIT Madras is a valid four-year degree that can be considered. Is this degree UGC recognized? Is this degree UGC recognized? IITs are institutes created under an Act of Parliament, the IIT Act. This act provides all
                        rights to IITs to
                        confer degrees. IITs do not come under UGC, and no degree of IIT needs additional approval or
                        recognition by
                        UGC. Any degree granted by an IIT is recognized as a legal degree. Can I do two degrees (1 Offline and 1 Online)
                        simultaneously? Can I do two degrees (1 Offline and 1 Online) simultaneously? Yes, students can do this program (BS in Electronic Systems) along with another degree program. Will there be any projects also in BS in Electronic Systems program (like we have in BS in Data
                        Science)? Will there be any projects also in BS in Electronic Systems program (like we have in BS in Data
                        Science)? For some courses there might be mini projects depending on the course. Will we get marksheet for foundation Course/Diploma Courses/BS Degree courses in Electronic
                        System ? Will we get marksheet for foundation Course/Diploma Courses/BS Degree courses in Electronic
                        System ? Semester wise progress card and Grade card will be provided Which mode of Learning (Part Time/Full Time/Online/Distance) will written on Marksheet ? Which mode of Learning (Part Time/Full Time/Online/Distance) will written on Marksheet ? Mode such as distance, online, etc will not be mentioned in Marksheet. What is Apprenticeship in Degree Level? What is Apprenticeship in Degree
                        Level? Doing an apprenticeship is optional. The program provides the students in the BS level of the
                        program to pursue
                        an apprenticeship with companies and research projects and earn credits in this level. Can I do an MBA Degree after taking up this course? Can I do an MBA Degree after taking up this course? Generally any graduate can apply for an MBA, but you will have to check the eligibility criteria
                        mentioned by
                        the Institution or University in which you are going to apply. Why is there no 3 years exit with a BSC degree in this course similar to Data Science? Why is there no 3 years exit with a BSC degree in this course similar to Data Science? In order acquire certain skills and knowledge required to be a graduate in the field of
                        Electronic Systems,
                        certain courses must be studied and it requires 4-years to study them. Hence we do not have 3
                        year exit. What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? Please send an email to support-es@study.iitm.ac.in and
                        ge-es@study.iitm.ac.in What will be asked in the qualifier exam? What will be asked in the
                        qualifier exam? The Qualifier exam will include questions related to four weeks of content of the four
                        foundational level
                        courses - English I, Math for Electronics I, Introduction to C Programming and Electronics
                        System Thinking and
                        Circuits. Does IIT Madras offer BS in Electronic Systems on-campus? Does IIT Madras offer BS in Electronic Systems
                        on-campus? No. IIT Madras does not offer BS in Electronic Systems on-campus. This is a non-campus program
                        only. Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus
                        facilities? Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities? Due to limitations of campus facilities and students being spread out geographically, learners
                        enrolled in the
                        program will not have access to IITM campus facilities. What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional
                        languages? What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other regional
                        languages? All our program courses are taught in English. Hence, we expect a minimum proficiency in English
                        language to
                        participate in the program. How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working? This BS degree is a 4 year program. On an average, we anticipate that a learner studying part
                        time will finish
                        the degree in 4 to 8 years. Check Acadmics page to better understand the program structure. What are the technological requirements for this program? What are the technological requirements for this
                        program? Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop / desktop device are necessary.
                        Familiarity with Google
                        tools would be an advantage. Students will have to procure lab kits and work on them, the
                        details of which will
                        be communicated soon. Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction? Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any
                        interaction? No. Students will have to study through pre-recorded video lessons which will be made available
                        on our portal. One or two live sessions per course will be conducted to clear doubts and interact with the
                        course instructor
                        and course support team. Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM BS Degree Program? Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM BS Degree Program? There are NO official WhatsApp or Telegram groups. We currently answer all questions / doubts
                        via support email
                        / calls. We will use whatsapp from our side to send you messages and reminders. Is there an attendance policy for this program? Is there an attendance policy for this program? There is no daily attendance, but once you register for the courses, submission of weekly
                        assignment is taken as
                        an attendance indicator. Minimum required scores in weekly assignments of a course will
                        determine if a learner
                        will be allowed to write the end term exam for that course or not. Can I take my exams from home? Can I take my exams from home? No. Every semester will have two quizzes and an end semester exam for each course. All quizzes
                        and end semesters
                        exams will be in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across the country. You need to
                        travel to the
                        exam centre and take these exams. Check Exam Cities in Academics Page. Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT
                        Madras? Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities provided by IIT
                        Madras? We will try to make internship / recruitment opportunities available to learners; we will notify
                        learners when
                        the opportunities arise. How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants? A large number of learners apply and participate in the qualifier process. After clearing the
                        qualifier process,
                        learners will need to clear foundational level courses, diploma level courses and then the
                        degree level courses
                        to finally get a BS degree from IIT Madras. That's a total of 142 course credits. When a student
                        is able to
                        successfully clear these courses and fulfill all the academic requirements, we are confident
                        that the students
                        will be employable. Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BS Degree? Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BS
                        Degree? The demand for skilled individuals in Electronic Systesm is high. Through our program, we do our
                        best to equip
                        our learners with required subject expertise. We are also planning to give soft skills training
                        as part of the
                        program. It is all about enabling IITM BS graduates with the right job opportunities. IIT Madras
                        will actively
                        reach out to the recruiters in the context of placement opportunities for the graduates of the
                        BS Degree
                        Program. Can I pursue Masters degree after this program? Can I pursue Masters degree after this program? Yes. You can do Masters degree after successfully completing BS in Electronic Systems Is this degree accepted for other universities/ outside india? Is this degree accepted for other universities/ outside
                        india? Our Diploma and Degree are official Diploma and Degree of IIT Madras. What type of Job will I get after doing this Foundation/Diploma/ Degree
                        Level? What type of Job will I get after doing this Foundation/Diploma/ Degree Level? Some of the major career options available to students taking this program may include the
                        following job
                        positions in industries such as Automotive, Semiconductor, Defence and so on: Electronic System Designer Embedded System Developer Electronic Hardware Specialist System Testing Engineer Can I do M.Tech through gate after completion of BS degree ? Can I do M.Tech through gate after completion of BS
                        degree ? You can do M.Tech, however, you will have to check the eligibility criteria mentioned in that
                        University/
                        Institution you are applying to. Is this degree valid to appear UPSC and SSC or any other Government Exams? Is this degree valid to appear UPSC and SSC or any other Government Exams? Every University sets its own requirements. UPSC and other exams such as State exams decide what
                        degrees they
                        recognize. From the side of IIT Madras we are happy to write to these organizations and entities
                        and inform them
                        that this BS degree from IIT Madras is a valid four-year degree that can be considered. Is this degree UGC recognized? Is this degree UGC recognized? IITs are institutes created under an Act of Parliament, the IIT Act. This act provides all
                        rights to IITs to
                        confer degrees. IITs do not come under UGC, and no degree of IIT needs additional approval or
                        recognition by
                        UGC. Any degree granted by an IIT is recognized as a legal degree. Can I do two degrees (1 Offline and 1 Online) simultaneously? Can I do two degrees (1 Offline and 1 Online)
                        simultaneously? Yes, students can do this program (BS in Electronic Systems) along with another degree program. Will we get marksheet for foundation Course/Diploma Courses/BS Degree courses in Electronic
                        System ? Will we get marksheet for foundation Course/Diploma Courses/BS Degree courses in Electronic
                        System ? Semester wise progress card and Grade card will be provided Which mode of Learning (Part Time/Full Time/Online/Distance) will written on Marksheet ? Which mode of Learning (Part Time/Full Time/Online/Distance) will written on Marksheet ? Mode such as distance, online, etc will not be mentioned in Marksheet. Can I do an MBA Degree after taking up this course? Can I do an MBA Degree after taking up this course? Generally any graduate can apply for an MBA, but you will have to check the eligibility criteria
                        mentioned by
                        the Institution or University in which you are going to apply. Why is there no 3 years exit with a BSC degree in this course similar to
                        Data Science? Why is there no 3 years exit with a BSC degree in this course similar to Data Science? In order acquire certain skills and knowledge required to be a graduate in the field of
                        Electronic Systems,
                        certain courses must be studied and it requires 4-years to study them. Hence we do not have 3
                        year exit. What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels? What is the overall structure of the program? What are
                        Levels? The program is split into three levels that have to be done strictly in sequence: 1: Foundational Level (9 courses + 1 Lab) - 44 Credits 2: Diploma Level (8 Courses + 2 Labs) - (44+ 42) = 86 Credits 3: Degree Level (12 courses) + Apprenticeship (Optional) - (44+42+56) = 142 Credits Check Overall Structure in Academics page. How much time do I need to spend on a course per week? How much time do I need to spend on a course per week? The expected effort is about 8-10 hours per week per course. How many courses can I complete in a year? How many courses can I complete in a year? There are two semesters in a year. Learners will be allowed to register for a maximum of four
                        theory courses in
                        a semester depending on their preferred pace of learning. Note that registration for any course
                        requires that
                        the prerequisite courses for this should be completed. How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of
                        the program? How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program? Each course page will have a discussion forum where learners can raise their course-related
                        questions and
                        interact with the course instructor or course support team. For all questions not related to the course, you may write to support-es@study.iitm.ac.in What is a quiz? What is a quiz? A quiz is similar or equivalent to a monthly test in schools and colleges. Marks obtained in
                        quizzes count
                        towards the total score obtained in the course. All quizzes will be in-person, invigilated exams
                        at designated
                        centres across the country. Are the exam dates flexible? Are the exam dates flexible? No, the exam dates are not flexible. The quiz and end semesters exam dates are fixed for all
                        learners taking the
                        same course in a semester. We try our best to schedule all exams during the weekends though it
                        may not be
                        possible for every exam. When will the Semester start? What is the timeline? When will the Semester start? What is the timeline? The semester will start after the Qualifier process. Those who are successful in the Qualifier
                        Exam can join the
                        program by registering for the Foundational level courses in September 2023. Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree? You can exit with Diploma in Electronic Systems. However, please note that there is no direct
                        entry to Diploma.
                        You will have to do Foundation level courses also, before taking up Diploma. Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or
                        university (like on the
                        NPTEL platform)? Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or
                        university (like on the
                        NPTEL platform)? IITM's BS Degree in Electronic System is a stand alone program. Credits cannot be transferred. Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier? Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier? No, the course content will be provided only in online mode so you can watch them anytime,
                        anywhere. There will
                        be no hard copy provided. Depending on the course, learners may be recommended reference books /
                        material that
                        they may buy separately. Is it mandatory to travel to IIT Madras for the Lab courses? Is it mandatory to travel to IIT Madras for the Lab
                        courses? Yes. It is mandatory that students travel to IIT Madras campus to demonstrate the lab
                        experiments specified and
                        complete the lab exams in person at the campus. During my lab session can I get any accommodation available inside the
                        campus? During my lab session can I get any accommodation available inside the campus? No. You have to make your own arrangements for accommodation during lab sessions and any other
                        logistics will
                        not be borne by IIT Madras. The program team will try and see if this is possible but there is
                        no confirmation
                        that accommodation will be provided. Will there be any projects also in BS in Electronic Systems program (like we have in BS in Data
                        Science)? Will there be any projects also in BS in Electronic Systems program (like we have in BS in Data
                        Science)? For some courses there might be mini projects depending on the course. What is Apprenticeship in Degree Level? What is Apprenticeship in Degree Level? Doing an apprenticeship is optional. The program provides the students in the BS level of the
                        program to pursue
                        an apprenticeship with companies and research projects and earn credits in this level. I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do? Please send us your registered email ID and a screenshot of the error / issue with relevant
                        description to
                        support-es@study.iitm.ac.in If the error is after payment has been made, please forward the confirmation email from Razorpay
                        along with
                        email ID, application number and screenshot with description. What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam
                        cities? What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities? If the city of your choice is not in our current exam cities list, please send an email to
                        support-es@study.iitm.ac.in. We will consider your request, but there is no guarantee that we
                        will add it. Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many? Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city?
                        How many? There may be more than one exam centre in any exam city. The count depends on the number of
                        learners in each
                        city and availability of centres on given date with our exam partner. What OBC-NCL / EWS certificates should we submit while applying or registering for courses? What OBC-NCL / EWS certificates should we submit while applying or registering for courses? Student has to submit valid certificates while applying / registering. These will be verified by
                        our team. An
                        approved certificate will be valid for two semester. Certificates that are outdated will not be
                        accepted. After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if
                        I fail the
                        qualifier exam? After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if
                        I fail the
                        qualifier exam? No. There will be no refund of application fee once paid. Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Can I edit my application form after submitting it? Your application form will be considered as submitted only upon making the application fee
                        payment. Until then,
                        you may edit the contents of your application form. After the application fee has been paid, you
                        will not be
                        allowed to edit the application form. In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will be
                        given a chance to
                        re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my
                        application to be
                        verified? My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my
                        application to be
                        verified? Verification of documents may take upto 3 weeks. Please be patient. We will keep you updated
                        about your
                        application status by email and on the dashboard. How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"? How to avoid getting my application "returned /
                        rejected"? After you submit your application, we verify the same before changing the status of uploaded
                        document(s) to
                        "accepted" or "returned / rejected". Be careful when filling the application form and double check the information you enter. We
                        verify the files /
                        documents you have uploaded (photograph, signature, ID card, SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD
                        document if
                        applicable). If any of the files / documents uploaded is unclear or broken or found to be wrong
                        or incorrect,
                        your application may be "returned / rejected". In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will be
                        given a chance to
                        re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline. Being honest and careful while filling the application form and uploading correct documents in
                        the correct
                        formats will help get your application "accepted". Check Application Process for required documents, document formats and sizes. Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two
                        preferences? Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences? No. You will need to pick two different preferences for exam cities in the order of your
                        preference. Your exam
                        centre shall be allotted in any one of the two exam cities picked depending on availability. We
                        recommend that
                        you familiarize with the currently available Exam City options to be able to pick your preferred exam cities. Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my
                        application? Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my
                        application? You will be allowed to change your exam city for any exam till 4 weeks before the exam date. Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed
                        for all the
                        later exams? Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be fixed
                        for all the
                        later exams? No. The Exam city preferences selected in the application form is for the Qualifier Exam only.
                        You will have the
                        option of picking a different set of Exam City options for each quiz and the final exam. I am a student of BS in Data Science. Can I join BS ES program also? I am a student of BS in Data Science. Can I join BS ES program also? Currently the BS Electronic Systems program exam dates align with the BS Data Science program.
                        Hence it will not
                        be possible to do both programs together. Program updates, if any, will be communicated and updated on our website. I have not done 12th Class. But I have done 3-year Diploma. Can I join? I have not done 12th Class. But I have done 3-year Diploma. Can I join? Yes. You can join as long as you have studied Physics and Maths in your 3-year Diploma Can we apply for Diploma in ES alone rather than applying for the degree? Can we apply for Diploma in ES alone rather than applying for the degree? No. There is no option to register for diploma alone. However, you have multiple exit options
                        which allows you
                        to exit with diploma What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE? Please send an email to support-es@study.iitm.ac.in and
                        ge-es@study.iitm.ac.in What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program? What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree
                        Program? Check Eligibility section in Admissions page for the latest update of the eligibility criteria. Is the program available to students currently in class 11th standard? Is the program available to students currently in class 11th standard? School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams can apply and go through the
                        qualifier phase
                        but will not be allowed to register for courses of the program until they clear class 12 (or
                        equivalent). Note
                        that a Qualifier Exam result is valid only for 2 semester (about 1 year) right after the exam. I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the Program? Yes, you can apply for the program if you have cleared class 12 or equivalent with Physics and
                        Mathematics. I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to
                        apply? I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply? Yes. If you cleared class 12 or equivalent in 2023 or earlier with Mathematics and Physics, you
                        can apply. There
                        is no requirement to have completed a degree program. How and where can I apply for the program? How and where can I apply for the program? Anyone who is eligible may apply by visiting our website https://study.iitm.ac.in/es/ and
                        clicking "APPLY NOW"
                        and filling in the application form, paying the application fee and uploading required
                        documents. We recommend that you go through the Academics page and Admissions page to better understand the
                        program and the
                        admission process before applying. What is the qualifier process? What is the qualifier process? All applicants will have to go through a Qualifier Process, wherein they will get access to 4
                        weeks of content
                        of the four foundational level courses. Applicants must go through this qualifier content and
                        submit assignment.
                        Eligible applicants are given the hall ticket to the qualifier exam. which is conducted on 6th
                        August 2023 Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam?
                        What is the passing
                        criteria? Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier exam?
                        What is the passing
                        criteria? No. Only the learners who get the minimum required marks in the online assignments during the
                        qualifier process
                        of 4 weeks will allowed to attend the qualifier exam. Only those learners allowed to write the
                        qualifier exam
                        shall be provided with hall tickets. Refer to Qualifier Process and the section below it to learn about the minimum required marks in the qualifier assignments
                        and minimum
                        required marks to pass / clear the qualifier exam. How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later semester if I
                        clear the
                        qualifier exam now? How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later semester if I
                        clear the
                        qualifier exam now? The Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 2 semester (or 1
                        year). How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year? Currently it is 2 application cycles a year. What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the program? The list of required documents is available on the Application Process section of the admissions page. After registering for a course in a semester, can I carry over the fees to the next semester if
                        I am not able to
                        complete the course? After registering for a course in a semester, can I carry over the fees to the next semester if
                        I am not able to
                        complete the course? No. A course registration is valid only for one semester. If a learner is not able to clear a
                        course in a
                        semester, they will be considered as having failed the course and will need to register for the
                        course again at
                        a later semester along with the required fee. I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier
                        Exam. What will
                        be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the Qualifier
                        Exam. What will
                        be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee again? You can re-apply again for the immediate next Qualifier exam in the same term at half the
                        original fee paid by
                        you. Your previous assignment scores will be considered and you will be directly eligible to
                        write the Qualifier
                        Exam-attempt 2 without having to submit assignments again. I applied for the Qualifer process but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment
                        scores to be
                        eligible to take the Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What
                        will be the
                        procedure to re-apply? I applied for the Qualifer process but I didn't obtain the minimum required average assignment
                        scores to be
                        eligible to take the Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for the same. What
                        will be the
                        procedure to re-apply? You have to re-apply as a new applicant with payment of full
                        application fee. If I have passed the JEE Main, Can I get a direct entry opportunity to the Foundation level
                        without appearing
                        Qualifier? If I have passed the JEE Main, Can I get a direct entry opportunity to the Foundation level
                        without appearing
                        Qualifier? Candidates who have qualified to attempt JEE Advanced in the current year 2023 are deemed to
                        have directly
                        qualified to the BS-ES program and can register for a maximum of four courses in the Foundation
                        level and start
                        the program. Is there any lateral entry for the Diploma students? Is there any lateral entry for the Diploma students? There is no lateral entry for Diploma Do I have to go to coaching center to prepare for Qualifier Exam? Do I have to go to coaching center to prepare for
                        Qualifier Exam? No. You don't have go to coaching center. You can do self-study. It is based on 4-weeks of
                        content that we
                        provide. What will be asked in the qualifier exam? What will be asked in the qualifier exam? The Qualifier exam will include questions related to four weeks of content of the four
                        foundational level
                        courses - English I, Math for Electronics I, Introduction to C Programming and Electronics
                        System Thinking and
                        Circuits. What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments? The overall program fees need not be paid at one stretch. The fees will be collected in each
                        semester based on
                        the number of courses you register for the respective semester. So, if you register for 2
                        courses in a semester,
                        you have to pay the fees only for those 2 courses. For more details, please refer to the Fee Structure in Academics Page. What is the mode of payment? What is the mode of payment? Fees can be paid only through online mode. Fees through DD will not be accepted. Note that payment cannot be made using a Debit Card. You can pay using any Credit Card,
                        Netbanking (all Indian
                        Banks), Wallet, UPI (Google Pay, BHIM, etc.). Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee? Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of
                        fee? Yes. After successful completion of payment, you will receive a confirmation email from
                        Razorpay. If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank
                        account? If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account? In case of failed payments, it will take 3 to 4 weeks for the money to be credited back in your
                        bank account. Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme? We are trying to see if this is possible. Please watch out for announcements regarding
                        scholarships / loans. Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of scores? SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS /PwD candidates will have concession in minimum scores required during
                        the qualifier
                        process to enter the program. Check out Fee Structure in Academics page. Note that there will be no such concessions after entering the program. (OBC
                        candidates not
                        belonging to the OBC-NCL category cannot avail any concession) Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower
                        family income? Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates with lower
                        family income? Only SC / ST / PwD candidates may avail fee waivers in the application stage. After clearing the
                        qualifier
                        process and exam, candidates belonging to any category (General / OBC / EWS / SC / ST / PwD) may
                        avail fee
                        waivers in course fees based on family income. Check Fee Structure in Academics page for details. What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? What does "family income" in the fee structure mean? The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of the
                        candidate, the income
                        of his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her siblings and children below the age of
                        18 years. After clearing the Qualifier Exam, all learners who wish to avail fee waivers based on Family
                        Income are
                        required to submit Family Income Certificate in the format provided in the Fee Structure section. Note that the Family Income Certificates are valid only for one year and will need to
                        be submitted
                        afresh each year to continue availing fee waiver based on Family Income through the
                        program. I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income is below
                        5 lakhs per
                        annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income is below
                        5 lakhs per
                        annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to avail the waiver? Economically Weaker Section (EWS) in India, as defined by the Govt. of India, is a sub-category
                        of people
                        belonging to the General category with an annual family income less than ₹8 lakhs per annum and
                        who do not
                        belong to any category such as SC/ST/OBC. Course fee waivers from IIT Madras are available for
                        general category
                        learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum. As per the policy of IIT Madras, and
                        as part of our
                        documentation process to ensure that we give fee waiver benefits to the deserving learners, we
                        require general
                        category learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum to submit both EWS certificate
                        and Family
                        Income certificate. EWS and Family Income certificates will need to be obtained in the format
                        mentioned in the Fee Structure section in Academics page. What is the registration process for the Foundational Level? What is the registration process for the Foundational
                        Level? Once you clear the Qualifier Exam, you will be allowed to access the Course Registration Form
                        from your
                        dashboard upon logging in. In the Course Registration Form, you will need to fill in the
                        required details,
                        upload necessary documents and pay the course fee to register for the first semester of your
                        Foundational Level.
                        You may choose to register for one or more Foundational Level courses with the upper limit of
                        four courses. Note that there will be an added Exam Fee applicable for learners opting to write their quizzes
                        and end semester
                        exams outside India. What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the
                        Foundational Level? What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the
                        Foundational Level? It is mandatory to upload 12th or equivalent mark sheet. In addition, any one of these documents
                        while
                        registering for Foundational Level are required: - Degree Certificate OR - Certificate of the highest level of education What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and
                        later? What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later? Please refer to the Fee Structure section in the Academics page to see which fee waiver may be applicable to you and the relevant
                        documents /
                        certificates that will need to be submitted. I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I
                        need to submit
                        them again while registering for the Foundational Level? I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier Process. Do I
                        need to submit
                        them again while registering for the Foundational Level? No, not required to submit again. However, the EWS / OBC-NCL certificate need to be submitted
                        again if the
                        previously submitted certificate is not valid until the end of the current financial year. I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any
                        fee waiver
                        category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come under any
                        fee waiver
                        category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments? Please be informed that you will not be paying the entire Program fee or Foundational Level fee
                        at one stretch.
                        The actual fees you will be paying will be in proportion to the number of courses you register
                        for in every
                        semester. So, if you register for 2 courses in the July 2023 semester, you have to pay the
                        course fees only for
                        those 2 courses. In the Fee Structure section, select your goal to be able to see a detailed PDF with breakdown of course fee over
                        each semester. Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student email ID? The personal email ID you applied for the program with cannot be changed. This email ID is used
                        to access the
                        whole Qualifier Process and the Foundational Level Course Registration Form. Once an applicant passes the qualifier exam and registers to courses, they will be assigned a
                        roll number and a
                        corresponding official IIT Madras BS Degree student email ID. After that, all further
                        communication and course
                        access will be through the official student email ID. Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level? No, the current portal will be used for all the Levels. You will be given a new official IITM BS
                        Degree student
                        email ID to access the portal. Will I be issued an ID card? Will I be issued an ID card? An ID card in electronic format will be provided, subject to conditions on use of the ID card. Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational
                        Level? Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level? The BS Degree has to be completed within a maximum period of 8 years. While a 1 or 2 year break between Levels is allowed, we recommend that you time the length of
                        your breaks
                        depending on whether you want to pursue a Diploma or Degree, and how many courses you are able
                        to take up in a
                        Semester. What is the eligiblity to write the End Semester Exam for a course? What is the eligiblity to write the End Semester Exam for a course? To be eligible to write the End Semester Exam for a course, it is mandatory for the learner to
                        (i) obtain an
                        Average Assignment Score >= 40/100 AND (ii) appear for at least one out of the two proctored
                        in-person Quizzes. Every course might have additional eligibility conditions to write the end-sem exam and obtain
                        the course grade.
                        Please check the grading document for details on this. Learners who are not eligible to write a specific course's End Semester Exam will not be issued
                        hall ticket for
                        the same. They will have to repeat the entire course including assignments and quizzes in a
                        later Semester. Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes? Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes? It is mandatory to attempt at least one of the proctored in-person quizzes in a Semester to be
                        eligible to
                        appear for the End Semester Exams. The quizzes contribute to the final course score and the
                        course grade and
                        hence it is recommended that students attempt both quizzes and all other assessments in the
                        course. Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End
                        Semester? Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for the End
                        Semester? For the courses you register for in the same semester immediately after clearing your Qualifier
                        Exam, yes, your
                        Qualifier phase assignment scores will be included while calculating eligibility for the End
                        Semester Exam. For courses that you register for in a later Semester, you will be required to repeat the
                        assignments in the
                        course again. Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent Semester? Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent Semester? The Qualifier Exam Score will be counted as Quiz 1 Score for the courses registered in the SAME
                        Semester
                        immediately after the Qualifier exam. They will not be used in any other subsequent semester. What will happen if I am absent for an End Semester Exam? What will happen if I am absent for an End Semester
                        Exam? Learner has two options: 1. Register for the course in the subsequent semester with the option of taking the End Semester
                        Exam alone and
                        by paying a reduced fee. 2. Repeat the entire course (including assignments and quizzes) by paying the full course
                        fee. What is the procedure to add / drop a course? What is the procedure to add / drop a course? Once the registration window closes in any Semester, adding courses will not be allowed.
                        Dropping a course will
                        be allowed within 4 weeks of the Semester start. Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades? Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades? Though it is not recommended, a learner may choose to repeat a course for improving grades any
                        number of times.
                        The course fee for repeating a course will be twice the regular course fee and the learner will
                        have to submit
                        the online graded weekly assignments, appear for the Quiz(zes) and End Semester Exam. The highest score among all attempts of a course will be used for calculating the CGPA. How can I change the exam city within India? How can I change the exam city within India? Each exam has a deadline before which change of exam city is allowed. Option to change the exam
                        city will be
                        available till each deadline in the student Dashboard, in the "Exam Cities and Hall Tickets"
                        page.  honour
                            code
 
Honour Code Effective Date: 15/06/2020 In order to participate in IIT Madras online degree programme, you must agree to the Honor Code given below and any
                additional terms specific to a course or program. This Honor Code, and any additional terms, will be posted on our website -
                onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. Honour Code Pledge By registering in an IIT Madras Online Degree programme, I agree that I will: ● Complete all tests and assignments on my own, unless collaboration on an assignment is explicitly permitted. ● Maintain only one user account, unless IIT Madras has approved the use of a separate user account in connection with an
                employer-sponsored or university-sponsored program. ● Not let anyone else use my username and/or password. ● Not engage in any activity that would dishonestly
                improve my results, or improve or hurt the results of others. ● Not engage in any activity that will cause grief or harm to the online degree websites/portals or study materials,
                including activities like hacking or accessing restricted materials. ● Not post answers to problems that are being used to assess learner performance either inside the course forums or in any
                other website. ● Not resubmit or submit work (in identical or similar form) for multiple assignments without prior explicit approval. ● Not submit false or altered or fabricated admission documents including signatures or certificates of
                enrollment or standing, registration forms, and medical certifications. Violations If you are found in violation of the Terms of Service or Honor Code, you may be subject to one or more of the following
                actions: ● Receiving a zero or no credit for an assignment; ● Having any certificate/degree earned in the course or programme withheld or revoked; ● Being unenrolled from a
                course or programme; or ● Termination of your use of the IIT Madras ONLINE DEGREE Site. ● Additional actions may be taken at the sole discretion of IIT Madras. ● No refunds will be issued in the case of any corrective action for such violations. Honor Code violations will be determined at the sole discretion of IIT Madras. You will be notified if a determination has
                been made that you have violated this Honor Code and you will be informed of the corresponding action that will be taken as
                a result of the violation. Changing the Honour Code Please note that we review and may make changes to this Honor Code from time to time. Any changes to this Honor Code will be
                effective immediately upon posting on onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in page, with an updated effective date. By accessing the IIT
                Madras ONLINE DEGREE Site after any changes have been made, you signify your agreement on a prospective basis to the
                modified Honor Code and any changes contained therein. Be sure to return to this page periodically to ensure familiarity
                with the most current version of this Honor Code.  Honour Code
 
India’s top technical institute, welcomes you to the Four-year Bachelor of Science (BS) Degree in Electronic Systems . Study from anywhere, at your own pace. Eligibility Anyone who has completed class 12 with Physics and Maths can apply irrespective of age, role or geographical location. Coursework Content, tutorials, doubt clearing sessions & assignments will be online, while quizzes, exams and labs will be conducted in-person. Lab courses will be
                                        in-person at IIT Madras campus. Flexibility Learn from anywhere, at your convenience. Option is available to choose the number of courses per semester. The BS degree will be awarded once 142 credits are
                                        earned. Skills The graduates of this programme will have strong fundamentals and industry-ready skills. Content taught by experienced IIT Madras faculty and industry experts. The program content can be accessed by learners from anywhere. The emphasis is on
                                        electronics, embedded programming, digital systems, and control engineering. The students will be able to apply the acquired engineering principles and
                                        knowledge to implement and improve systems and processes for applications. DEGREE PROGRAM B.S. in Electronic Systems In this program, students will have the unique opportunity to develop industry-ready skills to design and build Electronic and embedded Systems. ELIGIBILITY APPLY NOW DIPLOMA PROGRAM Diploma in Electronic Systems The Diploma is intended for anyone looking to grow their careers in the electronic systems industry or who wants to learn more in the field of electronic systems. Apply for and join the Degree Program (BS in Electronic Systems) and exit after completing the Diploma Level courses with a Diploma in Electronic Systems. Note: There is no direct entry to diploma. Everyone has to go through the qualifier process and join Foundation level first. Student Life Join a supportive, diverse, vibrant community of students and scholars who share your passion. Our reputation for excellence attracts some of the best minds in the
                                world. Alongside the academic activities, students can have fun and develop interests through clubs and extracurricular activities that help them build on social skills and
                                career goals while enjoying a great social life. Timeline Qualifier Application: Open Now (for May 2024 term) Qualifier Application closes: May 26th, 2024 Qualifier Week 1 Starts: May 31st, 2024 Qualifier Exam: July 7th, 2024 IIT Madras has a rich history of providing high-quality education and this program is designed to underline the fact that IIT is within the reach of everyone. The
                                    BS program is meticulously drafted and is aligned with the goals of the National Educational Policy. With the growing prominence of electronics in the current world
                                    scenario, education of electronics fundamentals at scale becomes crucial both for research & development and capacity building to meet the industry demand. Keeping
                                    this in mind, IIT Madras offers this BS course which we expect to help meet the need of our nation and aspirations of the student. We are planning to make IIT
                                    Madras a 'Vishwa-guru (Global Teacher)' through innovative approaches to enhance the quality of education. In order to support the students from financially
                                    disadvantaged backgrounds to pursue this program, scholarships are being provided. Prof. V. Kamakoti, Director, IIT Madras Who can join? Anyone who has passed Class 12 (or equivalent) in any year with Physics and Mathematics can apply. School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams (with Physics and Mathematics as their subjects of study) can apply. Those who qualify can join the
                                program after passing Class 12. Check out Eligibility . What is being offered? BS Degree in Electronic Systems Option to exit earlier with a Foundation Level Certificate or Diploma Are these official Diploma and Degree of IIT Madras? Yes. IITM senate approves and offers the Diploma(s) and Degree(s). Degree holders become alumni of IIT Madras. What is the Qualifier Process? Four weeks of courses and assignments to be completed. Those who get minimum required scores in weekly assignments in the four weeks will get to write the Qualifier Exam based on the four weeks of content. Those who get minimum required scores in the Qualifier Exam continue with the program. Others are encouraged to reappear for the qualifier exam. What is the Structure of the Program? The program is split into three levels: 1: Foundational Level (44 credits) 2: Diploma Level (42 credits) 3: BS Degree level (56 credits) Total: 142 credits for BS Degree For more detailed information about the program, courses and fee structure, check out the ACADEMICS PAGE World Class Faculty Learn from carefully designed courses taught by experienced IIT Madras faculty and other industry experts. Flexible Our program is flexible with exit points for learners from different backgrounds with different aspirations. Course Support Each course will have discussion forums with an active academic team to help in clearing doubts. Why learn BS Electronic Systems? As we know, electronic systems are at the heart of almost all modern engineering systems. By acquiring the fundamentals and skills one will be in a position to serve
                                the Automotive, Consumer Electronics, Space, Mobile, Medical Electronics, Defense industry as an electronic or embedded system design and development engineer. There is
                                a huge growing demand in this domain. 
 
CS1101 Foundation Level Introduction to C Programming by Prof. Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: CS1101 Course Credits: 2+3 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites:  None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS This course is intended as a practical introduction to C programming for electrical engineers. The focus is on gaining experience with writing and debugging programs. At the end of this course, a student should be able to: write, compile and run programs in C use debugging tools to find and correct errors in programs use various constructs in C and the standard library of C to implement basic data structures and algorithms understand the need for an OS and how programs interact with the system Course structure & Assessments 5 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam & OPPE(s). For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Write, compile, run programs in C, in a Linux environment; debugging tools WEEK 2 Variables, built-in datatypes, operators; Control flow - conditionals, loops WEEK 3 Modularity and functions; variable scope WEEK 4 Input/Output; Files WEEK 5 Pointers, memory, arrays, strings WEEK 6 Multi-dimensional arrays, dynamic memory allocation; issues - memory leaks, management WEEK 7 Standard library and common extensions (math, time etc.) WEEK 8 Implementation concepts: compilation and execution process; heap/stack; runtime and OS interface 
The course will involve a significant programming component for each step. The evaluation will include live demonstration of coding in instructor-led sessions. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: “The C programming language”, Kernighan and Ritchie Online references About the Instructors Prof. Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. 
 
CS1102 Foundation Level Introduction to the Linux Shell by Prof. Gandham Phanikumar Course ID: CS1102 Course Credits: 4+1 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites:  None Co-requisites: CS1101 -  Introduction to C Programming What you’ll learn The course is intended to introduce concepts of Linux-based operating environments. Students should develop familiarity with software tools and concepts required for managing software projects of different types. Course structure & Assessments 5 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam. For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Linux OS; kernel vs distribution; command line interaction vs graphical interfaces WEEK 2 Software management; package installation and updating; users, permissions, administration WEEK 3 Shell scripting; variables, IO redirection, pipes, background jobs WEEK 4 Text processing; file handling; interaction with other scripting languages WEEK 5 Software projects and compilation; make and dependency management WEEK 6 Version control; git; web interfaces WEEK 7 Basic networking; DNS; servers, daemons; remote access - secure shell
The course will have extensive practical exercises including instructor-led sessions and coding with instructors. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: “Introduction to Linux - A Hands On Guide”, M. Garrels, The Linux Documentation Project “An introduction to Computer Networks”, P. Dordal Curated online reference material About the Instructors Prof. Gandham Phanikumar Professor,   Metallurgical and Materials Engineering,   IIT Madras Prof. Gandham Phanikumar doctoral work is on heat transfer, fluid flow and solute transfer during laser processing of dissimilar metals. After joining IIT Madras in 2005, he has been teaching a UG core course on transport phenomena for several years. His research continues to involve concepts of transport phenomena in materials processing. 
 
 
CS2101 Foundation Level Embedded C Programming by Prof. Nitin Chandrachoodan Course ID: CS2101 Course Credits: 4+2 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites: CS1102 -  Introduction to the Linux Shell What you’ll learn This course addresses the use of microcontrollers (uCs) to implement embedded systems. At the end of this course, a student should be able to:
identify and distinguish types of uCs, their uses, and make design selection decisions write, compile, execute, and debug programs on generic uCs understand interfacing of peripherals and construction of basic embedded systems involving uCs and external peripheral circuits Course structure & Assessments 6 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Types of microcontrollers; programmability, memory, compute capacity, functionality, interfacing WEEK 2 Memory maps; peripheral interfacing; register mapping WEEK 3 Typical data structures and programming styles for embedded systems WEEK 4 General purpose IO, low speed interfaces WEEK 5 Bus interfaces: UART, SPI, I2C; introduction Modbus, CANbus WEEK 6 Human-Computer Interaction; keyboard, mouse, touchscreen WEEK 7 High performance IO; buffering, DMA; USB, ethernet, networking WEEK 8 Real-time operating systems; latency constraints; scheduling; FreeRTOS, Linux concepts WEEK 9 Video interfaces WEEK 10 System-level design, integration; SoC concepts + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Class Notes The C Programming Language, Kernighan and Ritchie Curated online reference material About the Instructors Prof. Nitin Chandrachoodan Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Nitin Chandrachoodan received his BTech (electronics and communication engineering) from IIT Madras in 1996, and PhD from the University of Maryland at College Park in 2002, in the area of high-level synthesis techniques for mapping DSP algorithms to architectures. He has been with the department of electrical engineering at IIT Madras since 2004, where he is currently an professor. ... more His research interests include digital systems design and design automation tools and techniques, as well as design of embedded systems with a special focus on assistive technologies. He has taught graduate courses on digital integrated circuit design and on mapping algorithms to architectures, and a UG course on data structures and algorithms, as well as a laboratory course on digital design using FPGAs. He is an associate editor of the Springer Journal of Signal Processing Systems. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
CS2102 Diploma Level Python programming Course ID: CS2102 Course Credits: 5 Course Type: Diploma Pre-requisites:  None What you’ll learn Using basic programming concepts such as variables, expressions, loops, conditionals and functions in Python Creating, manipulating, and using more Python specific features such as lists, tuples, and dictionaries Familiarising with and using common Python libraries such as random, math, datetime, scipy, matplotlib, Pandas etc Analysing real life activities and casting them as programming problems Applying programming concepts to analyse and solve diverse problems Writing Readable code and debugging it Building small applications using python Course structure & Assessments 5 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam & OPPE(s). For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction to algorithms WEEK 2 Conditionals WEEK 3 Conditionals (Continued) WEEK 4 Iterations and Ranges WEEK 5 Iterations and Ranges (Continued) WEEK 6 Basic Collections in Python WEEK 7 Basic Collections in Python (Continued) WEEK 8 Basic Collections in Python (Continued) WEEK 9 File Operations WEEK 10 File Operations (Continued) WEEK 11 Module system in python WEEK 12 Basic Pandas and Numpy processing of data + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Title: Python for Everybody. Author: Charles R. Severance. Publisher: Shroff Publishers. ISBN: 9789352136278 (The PDF of this book is currently available freely at http://do1.dr-chuck.com/pythonlearn/EN_us/pythonlearn.pdf) View all Diploma Level courses  honour code
 
EE1101 Foundation Level Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits The course is intended to provide an insight into electronics systems that are commonly encountered in daily life centered around sense-compute-communicate. The course will begin with a tear down of a laptop and/ or a mobile phone and looking at the various components. The standout component on the board is the battery which naturally leads to an introduction to voltage and finite energy sources. The course will then go on to identify a couple of ICs on the board like the processor, the RF components all connected to the same power source, each drawing its own current which can be used to motivate the idea of KCL. Basic network analysis will be covered as part of the theory to go hand in hand with these topics. Simple experiments will be conducted on a breadboard to demonstrate the theory where applicable. The idea of a microprocessor and memory will be explained with the help of analogies in an abstract manner. by Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan , Prof. Boby George , Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Course ID: EE1101 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites:  None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS Perform basic network analysis and analyse circuits using KCL, KVL, Thevinin’s theorem, Norton’s theorem, Simplifying resistor and capacitor networks Perform time domain analysis of first order RC networks Explain the idea of microprocessor and a memory Explain the idea of a program stored in a memory Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction,Miniaturization of electronic packaging,Mobile teardown,How small can a mobile phone get?,The battery,The charger,Back of the envelope calculations,The resistor,The Theory. WEEK 2 Introduction to "Voltage",Introduction to "Current" and Ohms Law,Series and parallel connection of voltage and current sources,I-V characteristics of Resistors, voltage and current sources,Nodal Analysis and KCL,Mesh Analysis and KVL,Measurement of simple resistive circuit,Series and parallel connection of resistors,Introduction to capacitors, Introduction to inductors,Capacitance and Inductance measurement WEEK 3 Dial, Talk and Hear,The Microphone,Motor and Generator,The Sinusoid,Energy of time varying signals,Harmonics,Electricity consumption at home WEEK 4 Problem Solving - Getting Started,Problem Solving - Lower and upper bounds ,Problem Solving - More Complex Problems,Problem Solving - Resistive Ladder,Problem Solving - Wheatstone's bridge,Problem Solving - Resistive Cube WEEK 5 Analog Mixer,Resistive Analog Mixer,Analog Mixer : Simulation,Superposition principle,Analog Mixer using superposition,Linear electrical components,Series and parallel resistive networks,Numerical examples on superposition WEEK 6 The Non-Inverting Amplifier,The Inverting Amplifier,Power Conventions ,The RC Step Response - Experiment,The RC Step Response - Theory WEEK 7 Low Pass Filter - Experiment,Low Pass Filter - Theory,High Pass Filter - Analysis,High Pass Filter - Experiment,Band Pass Filter -Design,Band Pass Filter -Experiment,First order analysis: Limitations WEEK 8 Problem Solving - Resistive Analog Mixer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,Problem Solving - Resistive Analog Mixer using superposition,Problem Solving - Superposition - Voltage sources,Problem Solving - Homogeneity Principle,Problem Solving - Power absorbed by circuit elements ,Problem Solving- Superposition - Current / Voltage sources -1,Problem Solving- Superposition - Current / Voltage sources - 2 WEEK 9 Analog vs Digital Audio Representations,Time Quantization,Amplitude Quantization,Sample and Hold Circuit,Flash ADC,Charge Sharing,Switched Capacitors,Capacitive Mixer WEEK 10 Laptop Teardown, Binary Number System, Decimal to Binary Number Conversion, Calculating Wave File Size, Analog vs Digital Computing, Digital Compute Blocks, Lab Instructions - 1 WEEK 11 Wired Communication - The Experiment,Wired Communication - Inductive Ringing,Wired Communication - Summary,Wireless Communication - The Radio,Wireless Communication - Modulation Techniques,Wireless Communication - Amplitude Modulation,Wireless Communication - Frequency Modulation,Wireless Communication - The Antenna WEEK 12 Problem Solving - LPF Energy,Problem Solving - Current Source and Capacitors,Problem Solving - Current Source, Capacitors, and Resistors,Problem Solving - Switched Capacitors,Problem Solving - Voltage source and Capacitor,Problem Solving - Voltage source, Current source, and Capacitor,Problem Solving - Current sources and Capacitor,,Course Summary + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: William Hayt, Jack Kemerly, and Steven Durbin. Engineering Circuit Analysis. 8th ed. McGraw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd: Mc Graw Hill Education; August 2013.
a. Chapters 1-5
b. Chapters 7-8 Digital Logic and Computer Design, M. Mano, 2004
a. Chapter 1 Horowitz P Hill W. The Art of Electronics. 2nd ed. Cambridge England: Cambridge University Press; 1989.
Note: Laboratory manual will be provided for the SPICE Lab. About the Instructors Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan Associate Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr Sankaran Aniruddhan is Associate Professor in the VLSI group of the department of Electrical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. He obtained his B. Tech. degree in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras in 2000, and Ph.D. degree from the University of Washington, Seattle in 2006. Between 2006 and 2011, he worked in the RF-Analog group at Qualcomm Inc., San Diego where he designed integrated circuits for Cellular RF applications. His research primarily focuses on CMOS RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless Communications. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof. Boby George Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr. Boby George received the M. Tech. and Ph. D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras. He is a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Madras. His research areas include Sensor Interface Electronics, Electric and Magnetic field Based Sensors and their Applications, Sensor Systems for Water Quality and Quantity Monitoring, and Biomedical Instrumentation. He also serves as Associate Editor for IEEE Sensors Journal, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, and IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Assistant Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras and is part of the Integrated Circuits and Systems (iCS) group. His research interests include porting machine-learning algorithms on to hardware and statistical analysis in VLSI. He also has a keen interest in Microprocessors and Programming in general. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
EE1102 Foundation Level Digital Systems by Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Course ID: EE1102 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites: CS1101 -  Introduction to C Programming What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS The course is intended as an introduction to digital logic and systems. At the end of the course, students should be able to:
understand and explain digital systems composed of basic combinational and sequential elements understand issues with timing and the performance analysis of circuits understand the use of finite state machine based controllers and their use in design of complex circuits understand the basic operation of a microprocessor in terms of a datapath and programmable control, along with memory interfacing Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Digital systems, Boolean algebra, logic gates; truth tables and basic theorems WEEK 2 Number systems; binary, hexadecimal WEEK 3 Hardware description languages; structural and behavioural design WEEK 4 Combinational design; HDL based modular design WEEK 5 Sequential elements; state and timing; timing parameters and analysis; WEEK 6 Finite state machines; sequence detectors and generators; control signal generation WEEK 7 Datapath and Control; simple microprocessor architecture; programmable systems WEEK 8 Basic instruction sets; assembly programming WEEK 9 HDL synthesis; implementing on FPGA + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Digital Logic and Computer Design, M. Mano, 2004 Digital Design and Computer Architecture, Harris and Harris, MK 2013 About the Instructors Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Assistant Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras and is part of the Integrated Circuits and Systems (iCS) group. His research interests include porting machine-learning algorithms on to hardware and statistical analysis in VLSI. He also has a keen interest in Microprocessors and Programming in general. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
EE1103 Foundation Level Electrical and Electronic Circuits by Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan , Prof. Boby George Course ID: EE1103 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites: EE1101 -  Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS At the end of this course, the student should be able to understand and analyse Linear Circuits in the time and frequency domain. 2- and 3-terminal nonlinear devices will be introduced. Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Review of: R, C, L, M, independent and dependent sources, Nodal and Mesh Analysis, Thevenin and Norton equivalent; Transient analysis of electrical networks WEEK 2 DC and AC, phasors, complex impedance and admittance WEEK 3 Laplace/frequency domain WEEK 4 frequency response, Bode plots, poles and zeros WEEK 5 RLC circuits, Quality factor WEEK 6 Complex power, 3-phase systems WEEK 7 Linear two port networks and network theorems WEEK 8 Non-linear elements - diodes and transistors + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Engineering Circuit Analysis, Hayt, Kemmerly and Durbin, 8th Edition, 2013 MICROELECTRONIC CIRCUITS: THEORY AND APPLICATIONS, Sedra, Smith and Chandorkar, 7th Edition, 2017 About the Instructors Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan Associate Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr Sankaran Aniruddhan is Associate Professor in the VLSI group of the department of Electrical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. He obtained his B. Tech. degree in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras in 2000, and Ph.D. degree from the University of Washington, Seattle in 2006. Between 2006 and 2011, he worked in the RF-Analog group at Qualcomm Inc., San Diego where he designed integrated circuits for Cellular RF applications. His research primarily focuses on CMOS RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless Communications. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof. Boby George Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr. Boby George received the M. Tech. and Ph. D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras. He is a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Madras. His research areas include Sensor Interface Electronics, Electric and Magnetic field Based Sensors and their Applications, Sensor Systems for Water Quality and Quantity Monitoring, and Biomedical Instrumentation. He also serves as Associate Editor for IEEE Sensors Journal, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, and IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
EE1104 Foundation Level Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits Lab The course is intended to provide an insight into electronics systems that are commonly encountered in daily life centered around sense-compute-communicate. The course will begin with a tear down of a laptop and/ or a mobile phone and looking at the various components. The standout component on the board is the battery which naturally leads to an introduction to voltage and finite energy sources. The course will then go on to identify a couple of ICs on the board like the processor, the RF components all connected to the same power source, each drawing its own current which can be used to motivate the idea of KCL. Basic network analysis will be covered as part of the theory to go hand in hand with these topics. Simple experiments will be conducted on a breadboard to demonstrate the theory where applicable. The idea of a microprocessor and memory will be explained with the help of analogies in an abstract manner. by Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan , Prof. Boby George , Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Course ID: EE1104 Course Credits: 1 Course Type: Laboratory Pre-requisites:  None What you’ll learn Perform basic network analysis and analyse circuits using KCL, KVL, Thevinin’s theorem, Norton’s theorem, Simplifying resistor and capacitor networks Perform time domain analysis of first order RC networks Explain the idea of microprocessor and a memory Explain the idea of a program stored in a memory Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction,Miniaturization of electronic packaging,Mobile teardown,How small can a mobile phone get?,The battery,The charger,Back of the envelope calculations,The resistor,The Theory. WEEK 2 Introduction to "Voltage",Introduction to "Current" and Ohms Law,Series and parallel connection of voltage and current sources,I-V characteristics of Resistors, voltage and current sources,Nodal Analysis and KCL,Mesh Analysis and KVL,Measurement of simple resistive circuit,Series and parallel connection of resistors,Introduction to capacitors, Introduction to inductors,Capacitance and Inductance measurement WEEK 3 Dial, Talk and Hear,The Microphone,Motor and Generator,The Sinusoid,Energy of time varying signals,Harmonics,Electricity consumption at home WEEK 4 Problem Solving - Getting Started,Problem Solving - Lower and upper bounds ,Problem Solving - More Complex Problems,Problem Solving - Resistive Ladder,Problem Solving - Wheatstone's bridge,Problem Solving - Resistive Cube WEEK 5 Analog Mixer,Resistive Analog Mixer,Analog Mixer : Simulation,Superposition principle,Analog Mixer using superposition,Linear electrical components,Series and parallel resistive networks,Numerical examples on superposition WEEK 6 The Non-Inverting Amplifier,The Inverting Amplifier,Power Conventions ,The RC Step Response - Experiment,The RC Step Response - Theory WEEK 7 Low Pass Filter - Experiment,Low Pass Filter - Theory,High Pass Filter - Analysis,High Pass Filter - Experiment,Band Pass Filter -Design,Band Pass Filter -Experiment,First order analysis: Limitations WEEK 8 Problem Solving - Resistive Analog Mixer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,Problem Solving - Resistive Analog Mixer using superposition,Problem Solving - Superposition - Voltage sources,Problem Solving - Homogeneity Principle,Problem Solving - Power absorbed by circuit elements ,Problem Solving- Superposition - Current / Voltage sources -1,Problem Solving- Superposition - Current / Voltage sources - 2 WEEK 9 Analog vs Digital Audio Representations,Time Quantization,Amplitude Quantization,Sample and Hold Circuit,Flash ADC,Charge Sharing,Switched Capacitors,Capacitive Mixer WEEK 10 Laptop Teardown, Binary Number System, Decimal to Binary Number Conversion, Calculating Wave File Size, Analog vs Digital Computing, Digital Compute Blocks, Lab Instructions - 1 WEEK 11 Wired Communication - The Experiment,Wired Communication - Inductive Ringing,Wired Communication - Summary,Wireless Communication - The Radio,Wireless Communication - Modulation Techniques,Wireless Communication - Amplitude Modulation,Wireless Communication - Frequency Modulation,Wireless Communication - The Antenna WEEK 12 Problem Solving - LPF Energy,Problem Solving - Current Source and Capacitors,Problem Solving - Current Source, Capacitors, and Resistors,Problem Solving - Switched Capacitors,Problem Solving - Voltage source and Capacitor,Problem Solving - Voltage source, Current source, and Capacitor,Problem Solving - Current sources and Capacitor,,Course Summary + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: William Hayt, Jack Kemerly, and Steven Durbin. Engineering Circuit Analysis. 8th ed. McGraw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd: Mc Graw Hill Education; August 2013.
a. Chapters 1-5
b. Chapters 7-8 Digital Logic and Computer Design, M. Mano, 2004
a. Chapter 1 Horowitz P Hill W. The Art of Electronics. 2nd ed. Cambridge England: Cambridge University Press; 1989.
Note: Laboratory manual will be provided for the SPICE Lab. About the Instructors Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan Associate Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr Sankaran Aniruddhan is Associate Professor in the VLSI group of the department of Electrical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. He obtained his B. Tech. degree in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras in 2000, and Ph.D. degree from the University of Washington, Seattle in 2006. Between 2006 and 2011, he worked in the RF-Analog group at Qualcomm Inc., San Diego where he designed integrated circuits for Cellular RF applications. His research primarily focuses on CMOS RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless Communications. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof. Boby George Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr. Boby George received the M. Tech. and Ph. D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras. He is a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Madras. His research areas include Sensor Interface Electronics, Electric and Magnetic field Based Sensors and their Applications, Sensor Systems for Water Quality and Quantity Monitoring, and Biomedical Instrumentation. He also serves as Associate Editor for IEEE Sensors Journal, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, and IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Assistant Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras and is part of the Integrated Circuits and Systems (iCS) group. His research interests include porting machine-learning algorithms on to hardware and statistical analysis in VLSI. He also has a keen interest in Microprocessors and Programming in general. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
EE1105 Foundation Level Electronics Laboratory by Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan , Prof. Boby George , Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Course ID: EE1105 Course Credits: 3 Course Type: Laboratory Pre-requisites:  None Co-requisites: EE1103,EE1102 -  Electrical and Electronic Circuits EE1103,EE1102 -  Digital Systems What you’ll learn Learning various fundamental concepts of electrical and electronic circuits. Learning Outcomes:By the end of this course, students should be able to understand the basic concepts of analog and and digital circuits and applying the same in real world applications. Course structure & Assessments 3 credit laboratory course For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Two-port networks WEEK 2 Resonant networks, frequency response WEEK 3 Time-domain response of first order systems WEEK 4 Nonlinear device characterization WEEK 5 Logic gates WEEK 6 Functional circuits WEEK 7 Datapath and control circuits WEEK 8 Sequential circuits + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Laboratory manual will be provided. About the Instructors Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan Associate Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr Sankaran Aniruddhan is Associate Professor in the VLSI group of the department of Electrical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. He obtained his B. Tech. degree in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras in 2000, and Ph.D. degree from the University of Washington, Seattle in 2006. Between 2006 and 2011, he worked in the RF-Analog group at Qualcomm Inc., San Diego where he designed integrated circuits for Cellular RF applications. His research primarily focuses on CMOS RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless Communications. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof. Boby George Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr. Boby George received the M. Tech. and Ph. D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras. He is a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Madras. His research areas include Sensor Interface Electronics, Electric and Magnetic field Based Sensors and their Applications, Sensor Systems for Water Quality and Quantity Monitoring, and Biomedical Instrumentation. He also serves as Associate Editor for IEEE Sensors Journal, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, and IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan Assistant Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Prof. Janakiraman Viraraghavan is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras and is part of the Integrated Circuits and Systems (iCS) group. His research interests include porting machine-learning algorithms on to hardware and statistical analysis in VLSI. He also has a keen interest in Microprocessors and Programming in general. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
EE2101 Diploma Level Signals and Systems by Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan Course ID: EE2101 Course Credits: 4+1 Course Type: Diploma Pre-requisites: EE1103 -  Electrical and Electronic Circuits What you’ll learn At the end of this course, the student should be able to:
1. Understand and apply the concepts about linear time-invariant (LTI) systems understand and apply Fourier Series representation of periodic continuous-time signals understand and apply Fourier Transform representation of periodic and aperiodic continuous-time signals4. Apply Laplace transforms to analyze LTI Systems Course structure & Assessments 5 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam. For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Signal classification (analog-digital, energy-power, even-odd, periodic-aperiodic, deterministic-random etc.), standard signals (unit step, unit impulse, ramp, exponential, sinusoids), transformations of the independent variable WEEK 2 System classification (memory, causal, stable, linear, time-invariant, invertible etc.), Impulse response of an LTI system, convolution integral, graphical convolution, system properties from impulse response, complex exponential as eigenfunction of LTI systems, interconnection of LTI systems WEEK 3 Emphasize similarities and differences with continuous-time counterpart
Continuous-time Fourier series: Periodic signals and their properties, exponential and trigonometric FS representation of periodic signals, convergence, FS of standard periodic signals, salient properties of Fourier series, FS and LTI systems, some applications of FS (eg. filtering) WEEK 4 Development of Fourier representation of aperiodic signals, convergence, FT of standard signals, FT of periodic signals, properties of FT, some applications of FT (eg. modulation)
Laplace Transform: Bilateral Laplace transform, region of convergence, properties of Laplace transform, standard Laplace transform pairs, transfer function of LTI system, characterising LTI system properties from transfer function, algebra of transfer functions and block diagram representations, Unilateral Laplace transform – brief introduction and application to simple initial value problems WEEK 5 Sampling theorem and signal reconstruction, notion of aliasing with examples, Sampling in frequency domain. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Signals and Systems: Oppenheim, Willsky and Nawab (2nd Edn). Principles of Linear Systems and Signals: B.P. Lathi (2nd Edn) About the Instructors Prof. Sankaran Aniruddhan Associate Professor,   Department of Electrical Engineering,   IIT Madras Dr Sankaran Aniruddhan is Associate Professor in the VLSI group of the department of Electrical Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology Madras. He obtained his B. Tech. degree in Electrical Engineering from IIT Madras in 2000, and Ph.D. degree from the University of Washington, Seattle in 2006. Between 2006 and 2011, he worked in the RF-Analog group at Qualcomm Inc., San Diego where he designed integrated circuits for Cellular RF applications. His research primarily focuses on CMOS RF Integrated Circuits for Wireless Communications. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: EE1101 - Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Diploma Level courses  honour code
 
Academics Overall Structure Course Registrations 
EE2102 Diploma Level Analog Electronic Systems Basics of operational amplifier, op-amp based building blocks, linear and non-linear system, feedback theory, negative/positive feedback, stability criterion, bode plot with gain and phase margin, compensation, passive and active-RC analog filters, RLC filters, voltage and current regulators, AC coupling input and output and oscillators. Course ID: EE2102 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Diploma Pre-requisites: EE2101 -  Signals and Systems MA2101 -  Math for Electronics II What you’ll learn Learning various fundamental concepts of analog systems such as open loop system, Active-RC Analog Filters, Op-amp based building blocks, feedback theory, stability of a closed loop system, compensation, voltage and current regulation, etc. Applying the above concepts in building an analog system prototype. Learning Outcomes:By the end of this course, students should be able to understand the fundamental concepts of analog systems and applying the same in real world applications. Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. Basics of operational amplifier, op-amp based building blocks, linear and non-linear system, feedback theory, negative/positive feedback, stability criterion, bode plot with gain and phase margin, compensation, passive and active-RC analog filters, RLC filters, voltage and current regulators, AC coupling input and output and oscillators. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Microelectronic Circuits: Theory and Applications (International Version) Paperback – 11 Mar 2013 by A. Sedra, K. Smith, A. Chandorkar Publisher: Oxford; Sixth edition (11 March 2013)ISBN-13: 978-0198089131 View all Diploma Level courses  honour code
 
Academics Overall Structure Course Registrations Assessments Exam Cities Fee Structure Foundational Level Diploma Level BS Degree Level Sample Certificates Academic Calender Admissions Important Dates Mandatory Requirements Eligibility to Apply Application Process Admission to the Foundation Level 1. Regular Entry 2. JEE-based Entry International Students FAQ About IITM About IIT Madras Faculty Co-ordinators Contact Us SIGN IN Applications open now for May 2024 Batch. Application Close: May 28th, 2024 | Exam: Jul 07th, 2024 APPLY NOW Applications open now for May 2024 Batch. Application Close: May 26th, 2024 | Exam: Jul 07th, 2024 APPLY NOW Home Academics EE2103 Diploma Level Digital System Design Course ID: EE2103 Course Credits: 4+2 Course Type: Diploma Pre-requisites: EE1102 -  Digital Systems What you’ll learn This course is an advanced followup to the basic digital system design course. It is intended to teach concepts of larger digital systems, and the corresponding design considerations, and is designed around the use of FPGAs to implement large systems. At the end of this course, a student should be able to:
go from an informal specification to a detailed reference design in a high level language implement a suitable hardware design using HDL, and take it through the synthesis and implementation on an FPGA platform analyze the design for timing and perform optimizations to improve timing, area and other metrics interface with a CPU core using system buses and build a basic system-on-chip Course structure & Assessments 6 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam. For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Algorithm representations and refinement from informal to mathematical specification; reference designs WEEK 2 number representations in digital design; fixed and floating point; hardware implementations WEEK 3 implementation of basic arithmetic modules in hardware WEEK 4 design of datapath and control; programmable systems WEEK 5 implementation of more complex signal processing applications; WEEK 6 optimization for timing and area; other metrics; Pareto optimality WEEK 7 System buses and interfacing peripherals; AXI interfaces + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Class notes “A Verilog HDL Primer”, J. Bhasker “Parallel Programming for FPGAs”, Kastner, Matai and Neuendorffer View all Diploma Level courses
 
EE2104 Course Credits: 3 Course Type: Laboratory Pre-requisites:  None Co-requisites: EE2102 -  Analog Electronic Systems What you’ll learn Learning application of fundamental concepts of analog systems by building an analog system prototype. Learning Outcomes:By the end of this course, students should be able to understand the fundamental concepts of analog systems and applying the same in real world applications. Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Laboratory manual will be provided View all Diploma Level courses 
 
EE3101 Course Credits: 4+1 Course Type: Diploma Pre-requisites: EE2101 -  Signals and Systems What you’ll learn To teach the fundamentals of Digital Signal Processing Course structure & Assessments 5 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam. For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Review of Signals and Systems: Discrete time complex exponentials and other basic signals—scaling of the independent axis and differences from its continuous-time counterpart—system properties (linearity, time-invariance, memory, causality, BIBO stability)—LTI systems described by linear constant coefficient difference equations (LCCDE)—impulse response and convolution WEEK 2 Discrete-Time Fourier Transform (DTFT): Complex exponentials as eigensignals of LTI systems—DTFT definition—inversion formula—properties—relationship to continuous-time Fourier series (CTFS) WEEK 3 Z-Transform: Generalized complex exponentials as eigensignals of LTI systems—z-transform definition—region of convergence (RoC)—properties of RoC—properties of the z-transform—inverse z-transform methods (partial fraction expansion, power series method, contour integral approach)—pole-zero plots—time-domain responses of simple pole-zero plots—RoC implications of causality and stability WEEK 4 Frequency Domain Analysis of LTI Systems: Frequency response of systems with rational transfer function—definitions of magnitude and phase response—geometric method of frequency response evaluation from pole-zero plot—frequency response of single complex zero/pole—frequency response of simple configurations (second order resonator, notch filter, averaging filter, comb filter, allpass systems)—phase response—definition of principal phase—zero-phase response—group delay—phase response of single complex zero/pole—extension to higher order systems—effect of a unit circle zero on the phase response—zero-phase response representation of systems with rational transfer function—minimum phase and allpass systems—constant group delay and its consequences—generalized linear phase—conditions that have to be met for a filter to have generalized linear phase—four types of linear phase FIR filters—on the zero locations of a linear phase FIR filter—constrained zeros at z = 1 and at z = -1 and their implications on choice of filters Type I through Type IV when designing filters—frequency response expressions for Type I through Type IV filters WEEK 5 Sampling: Impulse train sampling—relationship between impulse trained sampled continuous-time signal spectrum and the DTFT of its discrete-time counterpart—scaling of the frequency axis—relationship between true frequency and digital frequency—reconstruction through sinc interpolation—aliasing—effect of sampling at a discontinuous point—relationship between analog and digital sinc—effects of oversampling—discrete-time processing of continuous-time signals WEEK 6 Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT): Definition of the DFT and inverse DFT—relationship to discrete-time Fourier series—matrix representation—DFT as the samples of the DTFT and the implied periodicity of the time-domain signal—recovering the DTFT from the DFT—circular shift of signal and the "index mod N" concept—properties of the DFT—circular convolution and its relationship with linear convolution—effect of zero padding—introduction to the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm—decimation-in-time and decimation-in-frequency algorithms. + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Discrete-Time Signal Processing by Alan V. Oppenheim and Ronald W. Schafer, 3rd edition, 2010, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. (1) Digital Signal Processing by John G. Proakis and Dimitris K. Manolakis, 4th edition, 2007, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. (2) Digital Signal Processing by Sanjit Mitra, 4th edition, 2011, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. View all Diploma Level courses  honour code
 
 
EE3107 Electronic Product Design Course ID: EE3107 Course Credits: Course Type: Pre-requisites: EE3103 -  Sensors and Applications EE3105 -  Electromagnetic Fields and Transmission Lines View all  Level courses honour code
 
HS1101 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites:  None What you’ll learn Acquiring wide range of vocabulary and linguistic competence that is required for functional performance; Identifying patterns of basic sentence types and structural accuracy; Building elementary foundations for the knowledge related to conventions and use of language in society, particularly in speaking and listening skills; Developing the basic skills for creative reading and writing with precision. Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Sounds and Words (Vowel and Consonant sounds) WEEK 2 Parts of Speech and Articles. WEEK 3 Words and Phrases (Vocabulary, Phrasal & Modal Verbs and Idioms) WEEK 4 Speaking Skill (Spoken English Preliminaries and Telephone English) WEEK 5 Functional Grammar (Tenses) WEEK 6 Reading Skills (Skimming, Scanning and Comprehension) WEEK 7 Listening Skill (Active, Passive and Effective Listening) WEEK 8 Nuances of Words (Stress, Aspiration and Syllabification) WEEK 9 Speaking Skill 2 (Presentation and Group Discussion) WEEK 10 Writing Skill 1 (Basics of Writing) WEEK 11 Writing Skill 2 (Note, Business Writing and Essays) WEEK 12 Writing Skill 3 (Professional Writing) + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: Aarts, Bas (2011). Oxford Modern English Grammar, New York: Oxford University Press Murphy, Raymond (2012). English Grammar in Use, New York: Cambridge University Press. 4th Edition Krishnaswamy, Subashree and K. Srilata eds. (2007). Short Fiction from South India. Delhi: OUP. Dhanavel, S.P. (2010). English and soft skills (V-1). Chennai: Orient Blackswan. References: Oxford English Dictionary Croft, Sebastian (2018). How to Analyze People: The Ultimate Guide to Speed Reading People Through Proven Psychological Techniques, Body Language Analysis and Personality Types and Patterns (Available on Kindle) Malgudi Days: A collection of short-stories (RK Narayan) 365 Jataka Tales (Om Books International) 365 Panchtatra Stories (Adil Mukesh) 365 Tales from Indian Mythology (Om Books International) About the Instructors Prof. Rajesh Kumar Professor,   Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,   IIT Madras Rajesh Kumar is professor of linguistics in the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai. He obtained his PhD in linguistics from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Prior to joining IIT Madras, he taught at IIT Kanpur, and IIT Patna in India and at the University of Texas at Austin in the USA. He has been a visiting faculty at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai in India. His book on Syntax of Negation and Licensing of Negative Polarity Items was published by Routledge in their prestigious series Outstanding Dissertations in Linguistics in 2006. He is associate editor of the journal Language and Language Teaching. He has been part of the language teaching program at all the institutions he has been affiliated with. The broad goal of his research is to uncover regularities underlying both the form (what language is) and sociolinguistic functions (what language does) of natural languages. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: HS1102 - English II , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof Karthika Sathyanathan Alumna,   Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,   IIT Madras Prof. Karthika has an MA in English Studies from IIT Madras. She has worked as a Language & Education Consultant with multiple government departments and non-government organisations. Currently she is working as project officer with IIT Madras. Her areas of interest include ELT, multilingualism, multiculturalism and second language learning. less Other courses by the same instructor: HS1102 - English II , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
HS1102 Foundation Level English II Focus on achieving greater degree of fluency in functional and conversational English to understand subtle and detailed meaning in conversations and texts through short literary pieces and contextualized content. by Prof. Rajesh Kumar , Prof Karthika Sathyanathan Course ID: HS1102 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites: HS1101 -  English I What you’ll learn Integrating the basic skills of language into developing advanced skills of language proficiency to help compose clear and detailed writing on a range of subjects; Learning advanced level of vocabulary and socio-linguistic/ socio-pragmatic competence for advance reading and writing; Building nuanced structure for grammatical accuracy for fluency and creating confidence and appropriateness for expressing view-points clearly; Developing elementary foundations for comprehending and conveying underlying meaning in spoken discourse Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Patterns in Sentences WEEK 2 Patterns in Sentences (Continued) WEEK 3 Patterns in Sentences (Continued) WEEK 4 Listening Skills WEEK 5 Listening Skills (Continued) WEEK 6 Speaking Skills WEEK 7 Speaking Skills (Continued) WEEK 8 Reading Skills WEEK 9 Writing Skills WEEK 10 Writing Skills (Continued) WEEK 11 Social Skills WEEK 12 Social Skills (Continued) + Show all weeks About the Instructors Prof. Rajesh Kumar Professor,   Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,   IIT Madras Rajesh Kumar is professor of linguistics in the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai. He obtained his PhD in linguistics from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Prior to joining IIT Madras, he taught at IIT Kanpur, and IIT Patna in India and at the University of Texas at Austin in the USA. He has been a visiting faculty at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai in India. His book on Syntax of Negation and Licensing of Negative Polarity Items was published by Routledge in their prestigious series Outstanding Dissertations in Linguistics in 2006. He is associate editor of the journal Language and Language Teaching. He has been part of the language teaching program at all the institutions he has been affiliated with. The broad goal of his research is to uncover regularities underlying both the form (what language is) and sociolinguistic functions (what language does) of natural languages. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: HS1101 - English I , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective Prof Karthika Sathyanathan Alumna,   Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,   IIT Madras Prof. Karthika has an MA in English Studies from IIT Madras. She has worked as a Language & Education Consultant with multiple government departments and non-government organisations. Currently she is working as project officer with IIT Madras. Her areas of interest include ELT, multilingualism, multiculturalism and second language learning. less Other courses by the same instructor: HS1101 - English I , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
ID: MA1101 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Foundation Pre-requisites:  None What you’ll learn VIEW COURSE VIDEOS To introduce differential/integral calculus of one variable To introduce solutions for a system of linear equations To introduce complex numbers Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Introduction, Linear equations
Numbers, relations/functions, equations occurring in practical scenarios and applications
Cartesian coordinates, Equation of a line in 2D, Linear equations in two variables, Graphing software
Solving systems of linear equations by elimination WEEK 2 Functions of one variable, Limits and continuity
Functions and graphs, scaling/shifting operations, trigonometric functions, visualising functions
Limit of a function and limit laws, One-sided/two-sided limits, continuity of a function WEEK 3 Differential calculus
Tangent line, Derivatives as slope/rate of change, Derivative, Rules/methods for finding derivatives
Applications: Increasing/decreasing functions, Extreme values of functions WEEK 4 Integral calculus
Area under step functions, Finite sums, Integrals as area under general functions, Limits of finite sums
The definite integral, Fundamental theorem of calculus, Transcendental functions (log, exp, inv trig)
Rules/methods for finding integrals, Applications: Areas, Volumes, Averages WEEK 5 Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs)
Applications - Capacitor charging, mass-spring, pendulum
Types of ODEs, Boundary conditions, Solutions to first-order homogeneous, linear ODEs WEEK 6 Complex numbers
Square root of -1, Imaginary unit i, Complex numbers and arithmetic, Geometric representation
Complex-valued functions of one real variable, Complex exponentials, Examples of calculus + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: “Thomas’ Calculus (14th edition),” J. R. Hass, C. E. Heil and M. D. Weir, Pearson. “Calculus (8th edition),” J. Stewart, CENGAGE Learning. “Calculus, Vol 1, 2ed (An Indian Adaptation),” T. M. Apostol, J. Singh and S. Goyal, Wiley. About the Instructors Prof. Andrew Thangaraj Professor,   Electrical Engineering Department,   IIT Madras Andrew Thangaraj received his B. Tech in Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras in 1998 and Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA in 2003. ... more He was a post-doctoral researcher at the GTL-CNRS Telecom lab at Georgia Tech Lorraine, Metz, France from Aug 2003 till May 2004. Since 2004, he has been a faculty at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, where he is currently a professor. His research interests are in the broad areas of information theory, error-control coding and information-theoretic aspects of cryptography. From Jan 2012 till Jan 2018, he served as Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Communications. From July 2018, he is an Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. From Nov 2011, he has been one of the NPTEL coordinators for IIT Madras. At NPTEL, he has played a key role in the starting of online courses and certification. He is currently a National MOOCs coordinator for NPTEL under the SWAYAM project of the MHRD. Prof. Andrew is also one of the coordinators for the IIT Madras Online BSc Degree Program, which was launched in June, 2020. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Foundation Level courses  honour code
 
MA2101 Diploma Level Math for Electronics II by Prof. Andrew Thangaraj Course ID: MA2101 Course Credits: 4 Course Type: Diploma Pre-requisites: MA1101 -  Math for Electronics I What you’ll learn To introduce infinite sequences/series, first/second-order ordinary differential equations, vectors and multivariable calculus Course structure & Assessments 4 credit course, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.  For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit Academics page. WEEK 1 Convergence, Tests for convergence, Types of convergence WEEK 2 Types of convergence, Power series, Taylor series of functions WEEK 3 Application: Approximation of functions by polynomials WEEK 4 Second-order, homogeneous, linear ODEs with constant coefficients WEEK 5 Parameterized solutions, Power series solutions, Applications - Electrical circuits WEEK 6 2D/3D coordinate systems, Vectors, Dot product, Norm, Cross product, Lines, Planes WEEK 7 Linear transformations: Matrices, Row/Column/Null space, Rank, Determinant and area/volume WEEK 8 Conics, Curves in space: Tangent, Normal, Arc length, Application: projectile motion WEEK 9 Vector-valued functions of multiple variables, Partial derivatives, Tangent plane, Gradient, Extrema WEEK 10 Double integration, Triple integration, Areas/Volumes, Change of variables in integration - Jacobian WEEK 11 Rectangular/polar coordinates in 2D, Rectangular/cylindrical/spherical coordinates in 3D + Show all weeks Prescribed Books The following are the suggested books for the course: “Thomas’ Calculus (14th edition),” J. R. Hass, C. E. Heil and M. D. Weir, Pearson. “Calculus (8th edition),” J. Stewart, CENGAGE Learning. “Calculus, Vol 1 and Vol 2, 2ed (An Indian Adaptation),” T. M. Apostol, J. Singh and S. Goyal, Wiley. “Advanced Engineering Mathematics,” E. Kreyszig, Wiley. “Linear Algebra and its Applications,” G. Strang, CENGAGE Learning About the Instructors Prof. Andrew Thangaraj Professor,   Electrical Engineering Department,   IIT Madras Andrew Thangaraj received his B. Tech in Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras in 1998 and Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA in 2003. ... more He was a post-doctoral researcher at the GTL-CNRS Telecom lab at Georgia Tech Lorraine, Metz, France from Aug 2003 till May 2004. Since 2004, he has been a faculty at the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, where he is currently a professor. His research interests are in the broad areas of information theory, error-control coding and information-theoretic aspects of cryptography. From Jan 2012 till Jan 2018, he served as Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Communications. From July 2018, he is an Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. From Nov 2011, he has been one of the NPTEL coordinators for IIT Madras. At NPTEL, he has played a key role in the starting of online courses and certification. He is currently a National MOOCs coordinator for NPTEL under the SWAYAM project of the MHRD. Prof. Andrew is also one of the coordinators for the IIT Madras Online BSc Degree Program, which was launched in June, 2020. less Visit website Other courses by the same instructor: MA1101 - Math for Electronics I , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective , - Open Elective and - Open Elective View all Diploma Level courses  honour code
 
 
 


IIT Madras
BS in Data Science and Applications
(4 year Undergraduate Degree Program)
Student Handbook
Student Handbook
IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036
IITM
Degree Office, 3rd Floor,
Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036
support@study.iitm.ac.in
support@study.iitm.ac.in

Please read this
Dear student,
This Student Handbook is intended to provide IIT Madras BS Degree students with the
information and policies they should be aware of, which may help them make the most of
the opportunities offered in this programme. It also gives you formal notification and
explanation of the programme’s regulations, policies and procedures.
It is essential, and your responsibility, to read it and familiarize yourself with the content. It
should be kept handy and referred to during your time with us.
This handbook may be revised time and again. While this student handbook was prepared
on the basis of the best information available at the time of publication, all information,
including policies and procedures are subject to change without notice or obligation.
All rules and regulations in this document are approved by our committee. As changes keep
getting approved, we will update them here.
We hope that your time as a student in this programme is successful and enjoyable.
Thank you.
This document was last updated on June 7, 2024.

Table of Contents
A) Data Science & Applications
1. Highlights of the programme
2. Flexibility
3. Courses in the programme
3.1 Definition of credit in the program
3.2 Level 1: The Foundation level
3.3 Level 2: Diploma level
Diploma in Programming
Diploma in Data Science
3.4 Level 3: BSc Degree level courses
3.5 Level 4: BS Degree level courses
4. Fees for the entire programme
4.1 For students who are outside India:
5. Admission to the programme
5.1 Regular Entry into Foundation level
5.1.1 Eligibility to Apply for the Qualifier Exam
5.1.2 Preparation for the Qualifier exam
5.1.3 Eligibility to appear for the qualifier exam
5.1.4 Criteria for passing the qualifier exam
5.1.5 Validity of the qualifier score
5.1.6 Communication about qualifier exam results
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
8
10
10
10
10
11
11
12
12
13
5.1.7 Second attempt: If a candidate was absent or failed the first attempt of qualifier exam
13
5.1.8 Candidates who did not become eligible for Qualifier exam
5.1.9 Options to register to courses once qualified
5.2 JEE-based Entry into Foundation Level
6. Credit Clearing Capability
7. Course registration - steps involved
8. Direct Entry into Diploma programme
8.1 Eligibility to Apply
8.2 Qualifying Process
Table 1: Department Core/Elective Courses
Table 2: SWAYAM NPTEL Courses Applicable for Department/Free Electives
Table 3: SWAYAM NPTEL courses Applicable under HS/MG category for crediting in the
BS level
9. Credit Transfer
Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses
Credit Transfer from courses that are conducted on IITM campus (**This will be in effect
from January 2024**)
10. Learner Life Cycle
11. Design of certificates for the 4 levels of the program
13
13
14
14
15
16
16
16
17
18
18
18
18
19
20
21

11.1 Mark transcripts
12. Academic aspects
12.1 Academic calendar
12.2 Course structure suitable for online delivery
12.3 Evaluation and grading of courses in every term
12.4 Pass criteria for each course
12.5 Repeating a course
12.5.1 Registering for Courses: Term 2 Onwards
12.5.2 Repeating a Course - WA, WQ, U or I grade
12.5.3 Repeating a Course for Improvement
12.5.4 Make Up Exams
12.6 Dropping a course (This is not applicable for the students who are continuing after
qualifier in the same term)
13. Learning paths available
13.1 Prerequisite course requirements
Foundation courses
Diploma level courses
25
25
25
27
27
28
29
30
30
30
30
32
33
34
34
34
14. Changes in project grading (wef now) and Eligibility to enter the BSc Level (wef May
2024)
35
15. New Rules for Foundation & Diploma Level Completion
16. Eligibility Criteria Prize
37
38
17. Apprenticeship in the BS level of IIT Madras’ BS in Data Science and Applications 39
18. Software and Hardware Requirements - Mandatory System Specifications
41
Hardware
Software/Applications
Internet Bandwidth
For Online Interactions/Proctored Examinations
System compatibility test
Other References
41
41
42
42
42
42

BS in Data Science & Applications -
from IIT Madras
___________________________________________________
A) Data Science & Applications
IIT Madras has launched the BS in Data Science and Applications. In this program, the course
contents are delivered online and can be studied by anyone from anywhere, while the monthly
quizzes and final semester exams will have to be attended in-person at designated centres.
Depending on the number of courses completed, learners can earn
● a Foundation level certificate
● Diploma in Programming/Diploma in Data Science or both
● BSc degree in Programming and Data Science
● BS degree in Data Science and Applications
1. Highlights of the programme
Courses are taught by faculty of IIT Madras/other reputed institutes as well as experts from
the industry.
Unlike many competitive admission exams which work on the philosophy of elimination and
selection and admit a very limited number of learners into various programmes based on their
performance relative to that of others, in this programme there are specific qualifying criteria,
and a significantly large number of learners can enter.
Learners of any background, be it engineering, sciences, humanities, arts, medicine, law, etc
can attempt and join this programme.
There is no limitation on the age of the learner or their geographical location.
2. Flexibility
There are two entry and four exit points, with learners being able to exit with either course
certificates, or diploma or the degree. Learners can choose their pace of study every term.
Being an online programme, there is no geographical barrier to learning from this programme
- learners only need to travel to exam centres for exams each term.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE: This programme is NOT BASED on an admission process.
Qualified learners can attempt respective stages of the programme and those who clear each
stage will receive the certificate corresponding to that stage alone.

So, for example, the learner should be aware that they are not being admitted to a degree
programme after the Qualifier. It is only for the set of Foundation courses, which on
successful completion makes them eligible to enter the Diploma level. The diplomas or
degrees are obtained by the candidate only when the requisite number of credits are accrued
by completing the courses prescribed and satisfying any other mandatory criteria.
Admission to any level does not automatically entitle the learner to exit the programme with
the Diploma or the degree.
3. Courses in the programme
3.1 Definition of credit in the program
The credits here are based on the UGC system of counting 14 hours of learner engagement
as 1 credit. (1 credit mentioned here would be equivalent to 3 credits in the current IITM
campus Credit system.)
The number of credits required to graduate with the BSc is 114 while that for the BS is 142.
The structure of the program is as follows:
3.2 Level 1: The Foundation level
● Comprises 8 courses - English 1, English 2, Mathematics 1, Mathematics 2, Statistics
1, Statistics 2, Computational Thinking, Introduction to Python
● Number of credits: 32
3.3 Level 2: Diploma level
● Includes 2 Diplomas - Diploma in Programming and Diploma in Data Science
● Each diploma comprises 6 courses (23 credits) and 2 project courses (4 credits)
● Number of credits: 54
Diploma in Programming
● Database management systems (DBMS), Programming Data Structures and
Algorithms using Python (PDSA), Java programming, System Commands, Application
development - 1, Application Development - 2
● Project course in Application Development - 1
● Project course in Application Development - 2
Diploma in Data Science
● Machine Learning Foundations (MLF), Machine Learning Techniques (MLT), Machine
Learning Practice (MLP), Business Data Management (BDM), Business Analytics
(BA), Tools in Data Science (TDS)
● Project course in Business Data Management
● Project course in Machine Learning Practice

(Those students who fall short of the 54 credits in the Diploma level (temporary, for a few
students) will have to do additional courses in the BSc level to make up for the deficit in
credits. A student will be eligible for the BSc degree only if they complete 114 credits as per
the norms given.)
3.4 Level 3: BSc Degree level courses
● Total of 28 credits
● Mandatory 2 core pairs (Software Engineering, Software Testing, Artificial Intelligence
and Deep Learning)
● Mandatory course: Strategies for professional growth
● Maximum of 4 credits can be obtained from NPTEL, technical bucket
3.5 Level 4: BS Degree level courses
● Total of 28 credits
● Option of Apprenticeship - for 4/12 credits
● Mandatory to earn 4 credits from HS/MG stream, from NPTEL or program electives
● 2 level 4 courses in programming stream and 2 level 4 courses in the data science
stream should be mandatorily completed
Apprenticeship has been split into 2 courses - one of 4 credits that corresponds to the 4 month
internship and another as 8 credits for the term of apprenticeship that is continued from
months 5-8 in the same company and domain.
Apprenticeship is optional and one can earn 0/4/8/12 credits from it.
1. The list of courses in
a. Table 1: List of electives offered in the program
b. Table 2: List of NPTEL electives that can be credited at the BSc level
c. Table 3: List of HS/MG electives that can be credited from NPTEL
The list of courses in the 3 tables here are subject to periodic revision.
2. Refer Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses for process and credit transfer fee.
The course code defines the level of the course. If the course code is 2xxx,3xxx,4xxx then the
level of the course is 2/3/4 respectively.
The fee for the level 3 courses is Rs 2500/credit while that of level 4 courses is Rs 5000/credit.

Regular Entry
Apply
Qualifier
Assignments
and Exam
9 Foundationa
Level
32 Credits
Exit with
Foundationa
Certificate
from IITM CODE
Entry
Direct Admission
to Diploma
@
Diploma
Level
12 Courses + 4 Projects
54 Credits
©
Degree
Level (BSc)
28 Credits
Exit with
BSc Degree in
Programming &
Data Science
from IIT Madras
o Degree
Level (BS)
7 Courses
28 Credits
Exit with
BS Degree in Data
Science and
Application
from IIT Madras
Exit with
Diploma in
Programming
and/or
Diploma in
Data Science
from IIT Madras
4. Fees for the entire programme
● First year fees kept low to enable learners to try out the programme
● Entry fee for Qualifier exam: Rs. 3000 (non-refundable) - with suitable waivers
● Fee waivers for learners belonging to certain categories and economic backgrounds
Number of credits in each level:
Level
Theory
Foundation
Diploma in DS
Diploma in P
BSc
BS
32
23
23
28-X
28-A-B
A (0/4/12)
Project
4
4
X (0-4)
B=4
*Only maximum of 24 credits can be transferred towards non counted CGPA
course
Foundation: Rs 32000/-
Diploma Level: 62500 x 2 = Rs 125,000/-
BSc Level: Rs 2.21L - 2.47L
Apprenticeship NPTEL
MG/HS/HM

BS Level: 3.25L - 3.87L
Cost per credit
(Rs)
Foundation 1000/c
Diploma
BSc
2500/c for Theory
1250/c for project
Level 3 - Rs 2500/c
Level 4 - Rs 5000/c
1000/c for NPTEL
Number of credits
32c
23x2=46c
4x2 = 8c
20c for 5 mandatory courses (Level 3)
4c NPTEL+4c Level 3
4c NPTEL + 4c Level 4
8c Level 3
4c Level 3 + 4c Level 4
8c Level 4
BS
Level 3 - Rs 2500/c
Level 4 - Rs 5000/c
1000/c for NPTEL
2 Level 4 mandatory DS = 8c
2 Level 4 mandatory DP = 8c
4c NPTEL + 8c Level 3
4c NPTEL + 4c Level 3 + 4c Level 4
4c NPTEL + 8c Level 4
12c Level 3
12c Level 4
Fee waivers depend on the category of learner and family income
Family
Family Income
> 5 LPA
Fees
General
OBC
SC / ST
PwD
SC / ST +
PwD
Full Fee
Full Fee
50% waiver
50% waiver
75% waiver
Family Income > 1
LPA and <= 5 LPA
Docs Required
NIL
NIL
SC / ST
PwD
SC / ST + PwD
Income <= 1
LPA
Docs
Fees
50% waiver
50% waiver
Required
EWS +
Family
Income
OBC-NCL
+ Family
Income
50% waiver SC / ST
50% waiver
75% waiver
PwD
SC / ST +
PwD
75% waiver
75% waiver
75% waiver
75% waiver
Fees
Docs Required
EWS + Family
Income
OBC-NCL +
Family Income
SC / ST + Family
Income
PwD + EWS /
OBC-NCL +
Family Income
75% waiver SC / ST + PwD
Total fee
32000
115,000
10,000
50000
4000+10000
4000+20000
20000
30000
40000
40000
40000
4000+20000
4000+30000
4000+40000
30000
60000
Level
fees
32,000
125,000
64,000
74,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
104000
114000
124000
110000
140000

4.1 For students who are outside India:
Facilitation fee for exams is in addition to the above for candidates writing exams overseas -
as fixed up with the local exam partner there. These are subject to periodic changes
depending on the local exam partner identified.
Facilitation Fee
Quiz1 [irrespective of num of courses] = Rs.2000/-
Quiz2 [irrespective of num of courses] = Rs.2000/-
End term [per session] = Rs.2000/- [one course it is Rs.2000/- & more than one course it is
Rs. 4000/-]
E.,g If you opt for 4 courses
Quiz1 = 2000, Quiz2 = 2000, EndTerm = 4000
Totally 8000 to be paid as a facilitation fee
*Facilitation fee may vary based on country. Eg: Kuwait & Bahrain it is Rs. 3000/-
5. Admission to the programme
5.1 Regular Entry into Foundation level
To enter the Foundation level, applicants have to pass the Qualifier exam.
The Foundation courses allow for interested applicants with a variety of educational
backgrounds to be trained in the basics (Math, Statistics, Computational Thinking, Python
programming and English) required to take up the Diploma level of Programming & Data
Science courses.
Entry: Via the Qualifier exam into the Foundation level
Exit 1. Foundation course certificate
Exit 2. Diploma in Programming/Data Science or both
Exit 3. BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science from IIT Madras
Exit 4: BS in Data Science and Applications from IIT Madras
5.1.1 Eligibility to Apply for the Qualifier Exam
Minimum eligibility: Should have studied Mathematics and English in Class 10.
1. Anyone who has passed Class 12 or equivalent can apply irrespective of age or
academic background. Those who qualify can join the program immediately. View list
of accepted class 12 equivalents.
2. School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams can apply
irrespective of their group/stream/board. Those who qualify can join the program after
passing Class 12.
No additional eligibility other than the ones mentioned above is required to apply for the
qualifier process or join the foundational level courses after clearing the qualifying exam.

The week 1 content is available to all candidates to sample on the website
(https://study.iitm.ac.in/ds/academics.html#AC15) and view when they fill the Qualifier exam
form. The learner has to fill the qualifier form available on the website study.iitm.ac.in/ds
The learner has to pay the fees for the Qualifier exam - currently set as Rs 3000/-for Gen
category with suitable waivers for candidates from the SC/ST and PwD with 40% disability
backgrounds. Currently there is no waiver for any other group of learners.
The fee will not be refunded once paid.
5.1.2 Preparation for the Qualifier exam
All regular entry applicants must go through the 4 week Qualifier Process to earn admission to
the Foundation Level.
On the start date of the qualifier process week 1, access to the content for the four
Foundation level courses - English 1, Maths-1, Statistics-1 and Computational Thinking will be
provided.
The content that includes videos, tutorials, practice/graded assignments and text transcripts is
released week wise.
The content will be made live with an announcement on the portal, and an alert through email.
Every week the graded assignment must be submitted in each course.
5.1.3 Eligibility to appear for the qualifier exam
At the end of the 4 weeks, a qualifier exam will be conducted for eligible candidates based on
the content covered in the 4 weeks of study.
Each assignment will be graded out of 100
Any assignment that is not attempted will be marked as 0.
There is a change in the modality of finalizing the students who become eligible to write the
qualifier exam.
● If the average of the first 2 weeks’ assignment scores is >= 40/100 (or as per the cutoff
for each category of students) in each of the 4 subjects, the students will be eligible to
write the qualifier exam in the first attempt within the term.
● For those who do not qualify after the week 2 assignments, the average of the best 2 out
of the first 3 weeks’ assignment scores will be considered. If this score is >= 40/100 (or
as per the cutoff for each category of students) in each of the 4 subjects, the students
will become eligible to write the qualifier exam in the second attempt within the term.
● Reattempts within the term will be given suitably.
Only those who get the minimum required average assignment scores in all four courses (as
given below) will be allowed to appear for the Qualifier Exam.
Minimum Average Assignment Score
required in each course
General Learner
40%

SC / ST / PwD with 40% disability
PwD with 40% disability & SC / ST
OBC-NCL / EWS
30%
30%
35%
Note: Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various categories of learners is applicable
ONLY for the qualifier process. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass criteria
once registered into the program.
Hall tickets will be released for only those candidates who become eligible to take the
in-person proctored Qualifier Exam.
5.1.4 Criteria for passing the qualifier exam
In the qualifier exam comprising 4 subjects, the learner should obtain marks >= individual
subject cut-off as shown below. The total of all subject marks should be greater than the total
cut-off. The cutoff marks are clearly specified for the different categories of learners in the
table below.
Min. Req. Qualifier Exam
Score in each course
General Learner
SC / ST / PwD with 40%
disability
PwD with 40% disability &
SC / ST
OBC-NCL / EWS
40%
30%
30%
35%
Min. Req. Average Qualifier
Exam Score
50%
40%
40%
45%
The qualifier exam marks will be displayed within the login on the portal along with an email
and whatsapp alert sent to the candidates about this.
5.1.5 Validity of the qualifier score
The qualifier marks will be valid for the 3 terms that come subsequent to the qualifier exam
date for the learner to register to the Foundation level. This score will be invalid after this
period and the learner will have to go through the entire qualifier process (the 1 month of
weekly assignments) and retake the qualifier exam, if they wish to join the programme.
For students in std XII who take the qualifier exam, the validity is for 3 terms from when they
pass std XII.

5.1.6 Communication about qualifier exam results
Those who have qualified as per the above process will be intimated through email and
whatsapp and within their login on the portal - if they are eligible to register further. An
admission letter will also be generated and provided to each qualified candidate.
Once a candidate has qualified, they will not be permitted to apply again until their score is
valid, which is for the next 3 subsequent terms. After this they will be eligible to reapply again.
The fees paid to attempt the Qualifier exam will not be refunded in either of the two situations
- for those who missed writing the qualifier exam and for those who did not pass it.
5.1.7 Second attempt: If a candidate was absent or failed the first attempt
of qualifier exam
There are two attempts within any term currently. In every term, qualifier exams are conducted
at the end of 4 weeks and at the end of 8 weeks.
Eligibility to apply for Reattempting Qualifier exam within the same term:
● A learner who became eligible for the hall ticket in the qualifier process of a term but
was absent for the final exam
● failed in the first attempt
Such candidates do not have to repeat the assignments as they have already become eligible.
This re-attempt application form will open up immediately after the qualifier results are
announced. The fee for this is as follows:
General Category / OBC Applicant
SC / ST Category / PwD (>= 40%
disability ) Applicant
SC / ST Category Applicant who is
ALSO PwD (>= 40% disability )
₹1500 re-attempt fee
₹750 re-attempt fee
₹375 re-attempt fee
5.1.8 Candidates who did not become eligible for Qualifier exam
There are no limits on the number of times a candidate can attempt the qualifier process.
The candidate can attempt again the subsequent terms.
They have to pay the full fees as per the fee norms applicable for their category. (and
additional exam facilitation fee in case of candidates outside India)
This will be considered like a fresh application and they have to redo the 4 weeks of course
work and weekly graded assignments and become eligible to get the hall ticket for the qualifier
exam
5.1.9 Options to register to courses once qualified
● Candidates who qualify in the first attempt within a term

○ have the option to register to courses and continue with completing them in the
same term. In this case, qualifier score is treated as Quiz1 score to calculate
the Final score.
○ Have the option to register to courses in the next 2 terms till when the qualifier
score is valid.
● Candidates who qualify in the second attempt within a term can ONLY register from
the subsequent term till the qualifier score is valid.
In a learner’s first term immediately following the qualifier exam, the qualifier exam scores and
assignment scores in the subjects registered will be considered as Quiz 1 score and first 4
assignment scores of the corresponding subjects.
5.2 JEE-based Entry into Foundation Level
There is a direct entry into the Foundation level of the program for students who have qualified
for the JEE Advanced Exams. Currently the validity of this is for the 3 terms following the
release of the JEE Advanced Eligibility list.
Candidates who qualified to appear for JEE Advanced 2022 can directly join our program in
the Sep 2023/Jan 2024 Term and Candidates who qualified to appear for JEE Advanced 2023
can directly join our program in the Sep 2023/Jan 2024/May 2024/Sep 2024/Jan 2025 Terms
The process will be as follows:
Apply to the Qualifier process, saying Yes to the question on eligibility to JEE Advanced level.
Upload a valid proof for the same.
● If the proof is found to be valid:
○ The candidate will be declared eligible to join the Foundational level courses.
○ They will be issued the admission letter.
○ Such candidates can directly register to courses in the foundation level with
CCC as 4.
● If the proof document submitted is found to be not valid, the student will be moved into
the category of non-JEE and will be treated as a regular entry candidate to the
foundation level and have to go through the qualifier process.
6. Credit Clearing Capability
The value S used to determine the maximum number of courses that the learner is permitted
to register in a term is calculated as shown below.
● Term 1: decided by qualifier marks
● Term 2: decided by average of marks of all courses taken in Term 1 in which the
learner has passed
● Term n (n>2): M = average marks of courses passed in the previous two terms Term
n-1 and Term n-2 (This will be calculated using marks of subjects in which the

candidate has passed, not those which he/she has not passed or is not completed
yet); (n-1 and n-2 terms must be terms where the learner status is Active - defined in
section 11. Learner Life Cycle
Marks M (as defined above) Maximum number of courses that learner
is permitted to register in any term
0 <= M< 50
50 <= M< 70
M >= 70
2
3
4
The credit clearing capability CCC will be decided as follows:
● If a learner has passed at least one course in term n-1, then the CCC of term n will be
calculated based on the marks as given in the above table.
● If a learner has failed all courses the learner has appeared for in term n-1, CCC of next
term n will be 2.
● If a learner is absent for final exam of all courses, thus not completing their courses
and not getting grades, CCC of next term = CCC of the learner’s last term
CCC is kept as 4 by default for
● everyone who chooses to register to courses in the same term as the qualifier exam
● For all JEE candidates in the first term
● For everyone in the Diploma and Degree levels
7. Course registration - steps involved
Students who are continuing with the program will go through the following steps to sign up for
the courses:
● Within the registration window, students will pick the courses they want to take in the
coming term, with limiting criteria on total courses registered being their CCC i.e learners
can register to maximum number of courses <= their CCC.
● Students pick 2 cities among the choices provided for their quizzes and exams for that
term.
○ They have the freedom to choose a different set of cities than the ones they opted for
in the previous terms.
○ Also they can choose a different set of cities for every quiz/final exam while registering
for the courses so that accordingly booking may be done with the Exam vendor for
slots in these cities.
● Students can register to courses for which the prerequisite is completed. The
pre-requisites are mentioned in 13.9 Prerequisite course requirements
○ e.g. in order to sign up for Math-2, the learner must have cleared Math-1
● Students can take any course within a particular level of study but are not allowed to sign
up for courses across levels.

○ Students who successfully complete all courses in the Foundation level will be eligible
for admission to the Diploma level program.
○ Learners who successfully complete all courses in the Foundation and diploma
programme will be eligible for admission to the degree level, if they satisfy the
prescribed/regulatory criteria.
○ Students who complete 114 credits as per the norms will be eligible for the BSc degree
and can continue onto the BS level.
● Learners pay only for the number of credits they are signing up for (online payment only).
8. Direct Entry into Diploma programme
For those who have the foundations to enter the Diploma programme directly and those who
wish to do just the Diploma and exit with it, this is a pathway. It is primarily aimed at working
professionals or learners who already possess the fundamentals taught in Year 1 of this
programme to enter the Diploma level directly.
Entry - Into Diploma level
Exit - One or both Diplomas from IIT Madras
8.1 Eligibility to Apply
Students who have completed 2 years in any UG degree programme are permitted to apply to
the diploma level through direct entry. Their second year marksheet or higher must be
submitted as proof to qualify under this category.
8.2 Qualifying Process
1. A separate Direct Admission to Diploma (DAD) qualifier exam will be conducted for the
Diploma in programming (DP) and Diploma in Data Science (DS).
2. These are conducted on the same date as the end term examinations of the IITM BS
DS program. Hence these are conducted three times a year.
3. Any candidate crossing the cut off marks defined below will be eligible to enter the
Diploma Programme corresponding to the qualifier attempted and register to the
courses.
4. There will be no limit on the number of attempts by any candidate for direct entry,
though the recommendation would be that if they do not pass the qualifier, they
attempt through the foundation level.
5. The qualifier for DAD-DP will be a 3 hr exam, subjects being English, Aptitude and 6
weeks of Maths 1. Students have to study Computational Thinking, Introduction to
Python and then move on to the Programming Diploma subjects.
6. The qualifier exam for the DAD-DS will be a 4 hr exam, with subjects being English,
Maths 1, Statistics 1 and Python programming. Students have to start with Maths 2
and Statistics 2 and then continue with subjects in the Data Science diploma.

Students who have completed the Diploma in Data Science by Direct admission are directly
eligible to also pursue the Diploma in Programming, if they wish to, without attempting the
qualifier exam for this.
But students who complete the Diploma in Programming and wish to pursue the Diploma in
Data Science have to appear for the qualifier for DS as they would not have studied Statistics
1 and Maths 1 as part of course work.
Fees for the DAD
qualifier exam
GEN / OBC-CL
SC/ST/PwD
Rs 6000/-
Rs 3000/-
SC/ST AND PwD Rs 1500/-
OBC-NCL, EWS Rs 6000/-
Minimum
required
Qualifier Exam
Score in each
subject
40%
30%
30%
35%
Table 1: Department Core/Elective Courses
Jan 2028| CourseFes
Cut off marks required
in DAD Qualifier exam
50/100
40/100
40/100
45/100

Table 2: SWAYAM NPTEL Courses Applicable for Department/Free
Electives
The NPTEL courses given in the below can be credited at the BSc level. Any course can be
credited only once in this programme. Also, the same NPTEL course cannot be credited twice -
within your college for another academic programme and this BSc programme. It should be credited
only in either of the above.
SWAYAM NPTEL Approved Dep/Free Elective course list:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSJXV0JECyoQvgWvBlVxO13G0KRm5a1q
NCRBa7rAw8GDY4e0cfm1KiVCwIgs_ed80ObtzQ1rfx_JWIR/pubhtml?gid=399341609&single=t
rue
Note that the list of courses is subject to periodic revision.
Table 3: SWAYAM NPTEL courses Applicable under HS/MG
category for crediting in the BS level
Upto a maximum of 4 credits can be credited under the HM category in the BS degree level,
which can be done from NPTEL or courses within the program.
(Refer Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses)
SWAYAM NPTEL Approved HS/MG course list:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSJXV0JECyoQvgWvBlVxO13G0KRm5a
1qNCRBa7rAw8GDY4e0cfm1KiVCwIgs_ed80ObtzQ1rfx_JWIR/pubhtml?gid=1418834182&si
ngle=true
Note that the list of courses is subject to periodic revision. From the NPTEL course URL, please select the
SWAYAM Certification courses. Only these are eligible for Credit Transfer
9. Credit Transfer
Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses
The following process is to be followed for credit transfer from NPTEL:
a. An NPTEL course of duration 4/8/12 weeks carries credit equivalence of 1/2/3 credits in
the BS degree program.
b. The learner must register for the NPTEL exam using the @ds.study.iitm.ac.in Email ID.
c. The learner has to register for NPTEL exams, pay the exam fee, and complete the NPTEL
course.

d. An NPTEL course can be transferred for credit only once and only to one program. The
learner has to give an undertaking that they are submitting this course for credit transfer
only to the IITM BS Degree program.
e. The NPTEL courses will be added in PASS/FAIL mode and counted towards the credits
with no letter grade and will not be included in the CGPA calculation.
f. The fee for credit transfer from NPTEL courses is fixed as Rs 1000/- per credit. Hence, Rs
1000/-, Rs 2000/-, Rs 3000/- should be remitted as fees if a learner opts for credit transfer
from NPTEL courses of duration 4/8/12 weeks. This fee is to be paid to the BS degree
program, and is separate from the fee to be paid to NPTEL to complete the course.
g. The learner can complete NPTEL courses any time after joining the Foundation Level
(using the official IITM email) and apply for the course credit transfer in the BSc/BS levels.
h. Refer the below table to know which term NPTEL courses can be transferred to which
term in BS
NPTEL courses completed in below term Credit Transfer to BS Program in Term
January
September
July
January
Credit Transfer from courses that are conducted on IITM
campus (**This will be in effect from January 2024**)
● A maximum of 24 credits can be earned from IITM campus courses.
● Students who have completed the foundation and the 2 diplomas and have cgpa of
>=8 will be eligible to earn credits from campus courses.
● The maximum number of credits that can be taken at the BSc level will be 8. These
credits are to be obtained from the Engineering, Science or Management departments.
● Students who have completed 114 credits in the IITM BS program and completed the
BSc level with a cgpa of >=8 will be permitted to credit 24-x credits at the BS level
where x is the number of credits they have earned in the BSc level from IITM campus
courses. A maximum of 8 credits can be transferred from the HS category in the BS
level, including the HS category credits earned through NPTEL.
● IITM BS students can apply to courses they are interested in and their acceptance will
be based on the availability of seats for the course.
● The fees for transferring the credits from each on-campus course will be Rs 2500/- per
credit of IITM BS program. The fee to be paid to the institute will be apart from this and
will be as per the institute norms.
● Students will have to attend the class in person unless a hybrid mode of accessing the
classes is available. The on-campus courses credited by the BS students will be listed
in the transcript along with the corresponding grades. The credits transferred from the
on-campus courses into the BS program will be counted towards the CGPA of the
student.

10. Learner Life Cycle
Once a learner clears the qualifier, he/she will be eligible to register for the Foundation level.
Using their personal email id, they register to as many courses as permitted by CCC and
make the payment. After approval of the uploaded documents, the learner is given a
roll_number@ds.study.iitm.ac.in email id.
Henceforth all interactions on the portal right from login to accessing the learner dashboard
and courses will be via this email id.
There will be 5 statuses for any learner in the programme : On the rolls/Active, On Academic
Probation, Struck off the rolls, Alumnus, Quit the programme
● On the rolls/Active - When a learner is registered in any term for one or more courses
after paying the course fees, the status will be “On the rolls” or Active.
● On academic probation/Not registering to any course in a term:
After joining the programme, a learner may skip up to 2 terms consecutively without
taking any courses. In the two terms where the learner does not register for any
course, the learner status will be marked as “On Academic Probation”. The learner
email ID will still be kept alive while the learner is on academic probation.
○ The learner can actively inform us about not registering to courses by paying the
“Registration keep alive fee (RKA)” of Rs 1000/- per term. In case of registering to
courses in the next term, the learners have to only pay the course fees.
○ The learner may not pay the RKA and have it as pending to be paid. Pending RKA
will include 10% extra over regular RKA when re-registering back.
■ To register to courses in the next term if not paid the RKA: The learner will
have to pay the pending dues = (which will be Rs 1100/- or Rs 2200/- (Rs
1000 RKA +10% as penalty for each term where no courses are
registered). The learner has to select the courses and pay the course fees.
Once they do this, the learner status is changed to "On the rolls".
● Struck off the rolls: If a learner with status “On Academic Probation” for 2 consecutive
terms does not register for courses in the next term too, the learner’s status is changed to
"Struck off the rolls". The official email id is suspended.
● Once struck off the rolls, to reactivate the registration, they will have to apply
through a separate process as defined:
● If the RKA for the previous 3 terms has already been paid, they have to request for
reactivating the email id on payment of Re-admission fee of Rs 2500/-. Once done,
they can register for the courses in the upcoming term.
● If the RKA for the previous 3 terms has not been paid, the learner has to apply to
activate his/her account by paying the pending dues which will be Rs 5800/- = Rs
2500 (Readmission fee) + Rs 3300/- (Rs 1000 RKA x 3terms+Rs 300 (10% as
penalty)). On receipt of the payment, the official email id is activated again and they
are permitted to register using this id. Once they do this, the status is changed to
"On the rolls".
● Any learner who is struck off the rolls 2 times, is removed from the programme.
● Quitting the programme: There will also be an option inside the candidate dashboard
which says "I quit the programme". Once the learner applies for this midway through a

level, we suspend the official email account and activate the personal email account to
access the dashboard. No reactivation for continuing the program is possible.
● Alumnus: Learners who complete the BSc level / BS level and quit the program, at the
end of it, we again suspend the official email id and activate the personal email
account to access the dashboard. Their status will be changed to “Alumnus”.
Students completing the foundation or diploma level and quitting the programme will have
status as “FL certified” and “DS certified”/”DP certified”/”Both diplomas certified” but will not be
awarded the Alumnus status.
Timeline for certificate:
*We need to get the senate approval before generating the original certificate. Senate
meetings will be conducted three or four times in a year. Please refer the below timeline for
certificate issue date
Term
May 2023
Cut off date for quit
gform response
Friday, November 17,
2023
Sep 2023 Friday, December 1, 2023
Cert Delivery date
Friday, December 22,
2023
Friday, December 15,
2023*
Sep 2023 Friday, January 12, 2024 Friday, March 1, 2024
Jan 2024 Friday, March 15, 2024 Tuesday, April 2, 2024*
Jan 2024 Monday, May 20, 2024 Wednesday, July 3, 2024
May 2024 Sunday, July 28, 2024 Sunday, August 11, 2024*
May 2024
Sep 2024
Sep 2024
Sunday, September 22,
2024
Sunday, November 17,
2024
Sunday, January 12,
2025
Tuesday, November 5,
2024
Monday, December 2,
2024*
Thursday, February 27,
2025
Type of Cert
Original
Provisional
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
Provisional
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
Provisional
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
Provisional
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
*Applicable only for project only registered students.
2024 calendar link: https://study.iitm.ac.in/ds/academic_calendar.html
Note: Updated photo used for hall ticket will be printed in provisional certificate.
11. Design of certificates for the 4 levels of the program
The design has been finalised for the 4 levels of certificates, as shown on the website.

Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Aarcliy confers the dapree off
Bachelor of Science (B.HJ
a
Data Science and Applications
on
NAME OF LEARNER
Goon his day the Tuonty larthe of,(fale 2004
of the Srstitute
ender the weal
0s21n0023
Signittine
Doishen
Fignatine
Fignatine
Dents
Ceatman BeardofGeucrnrs
Sndian Institute of Technology Madras
eroby confers the
BSc in Programming and Data Science
on
ERE
t
2
Gwen this daytheFuclth
of Siplember, 2022 ae
under the seal of, the Institute
NAME OF LEARNER
Lage
As"
Chairman, Board of Governors
Sndian Institute of Technology Madras
Kereby confers the
Diploma tn Programming
on
MRE
oe
t
NAME OF LEARNER
Given this day the Twelfth
of,September, 2022
under lhe seal of the Institute
pDs21A0023
Cag
ae
F a
ae
Registrar
Lirector
Chairman, Board of, Governors

Sndian Mnstitute of Technology Madras
herely confers lhe
Diploma in Data Science
AZ
NAME OF LEARNER
Given this day the TwelfthofSeptember, 2022
under the seal of the Institute
Fa Cate
Cte
Sbeyistrar
Director
Chawman, Bourd of Governors
Indian Institute ofTechnology Madras
Centre for Outreach and Digital Education
This is to certify that
LearnerName
has successfully completed the Foundational Level in
Programming and Data Science
Term_Year
RollNumber
Nope
Nop
ae
Program Coordinator
L.
Design for provisional certificates:
Director
age
Chairman, Centre for Outreach and Digital Education
|

Sudian SJustitute of Technology Madras
NAME OF LEARNER
has completed the requirements for the
BSc IN PROGRAMMING AND DATA SCIENCE
on this day the Twenty Seventh of May 2023
|
ppszta0azs
M-Vemalk
tft}-—
Prof. Vignesh Muthuvijayan
Coordinator
IIT Madras BS Program
Prof. Andrew Thangaraj
Coordinator
IIT Madras BS Program
Sndian Institute of Technology Madras
NAME OF LEARNER
has completed the requirements for the
DIPLOMA IN PROGRAMMING
on this day the Twenty Seventh of May 2023
ppsztaoaes
a}
M. Vga
tt}—
Prof. Vignesh Muthuvijayan
Coordinator
IIT Madras BS Program
Prof. Andrew Thangaraj
Coordinator
IIT Madras BS Program
Sndian IJustitute of Technology Madras
NAME OF LEARNER
has completed the requirements for the
DIPLOMA IN DATA SCIENCE
oO
on this day the Twenty Seventh of May 2023
ach
pps21a00zs
M - Usman
Prof. Vignesh Muthuvijayan
Coordinator
IIT Madras BS Program
tf}-—
Prof, Andrew Thangaraj
Coordinator
IIT Madras BS Program

11.1 Mark transcripts
There will be 2 types of documents that will be made available automatically.
1. Term wise Progress card
This document will list all the courses taken by the learner term wise.
The values for every course will be course code, course name, level, grade obtained.
Note that the transcript will show all attempts and grades obtained in each of the
attempts.
2. Grade Card
This will have the courses at each level listed only once. The best score obtained
among all attempts for each course is what will be shown here.
GPA will be calculated for the courses in a particular term of the programme.
GPA= (GPi*Ci)/ Ci
Σ𝑖
Σ
Where GP = grade point of a course and Ci is the number of credits assigned to that
course and Ci is the total number of credits of all courses in the term, including those with
Σ
U or W grades.
The CGPA will also be computed for all unique courses completed until this point in time
with the best grade being considered in case a course is attempted multiple times.
11.2 Procedure to Apply for Official Transcript & Bonafide
Certificate
Students who are interested in applying for a transcript/bonafide certificate have to follow
these steps. Note that these certificates will be issued every Thursday. Students have to plan
suitably and contact us.
Please refer the link to know the criteria for official documents given to students:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQnn2cFan5BqTTAByCoqtue-0XSmFXQPT9
1bADDL_i33tHMh8C0ZJepvFBwze4E5zJbGiBMdQa59VeT/pub
12. Academic aspects
12.1 Academic calendar
1. There will be 3 terms every year - Jan-Apr, May-Aug and Sep-Dec.
2. All the foundation, diploma level courses, the mandatory courses of the BSc level will
be offered in every term.

Three Terms a Year
January Term
May Term
JAN
FEB
MAR
APR
MAY
JUN
JUL
AUG
SEP
September Term
OCT
NOV
DEC
Regular Term
MONTH 1
MONTH 2
MONTH 3
Register > |«—— 12 weeks of coursework —————>
and pay
|
Quiz 1
|
Quiz 2
End Term
Exams
Term Ends >
* While 36 months (3 years/9 terms) is time permitted for completion of any level, 96 months
(8 years/24 terms) is the time permitted for the entire programme.
For Project:
Category
New Registration
Fee for Level 1 or 2 reattempt
If the project is not completed in the registered term - the fee is
retained for the subsequent term, grade will be marked as I.
. If the project is not completed in the second term also, then the
registration becomes invalid, grade will be marked as U and the
student has to pay the full fees again.
If the student fails in the project, grade awarded will be U and
Student has to redo the project by registering to the project by
paying the full fees.
If the submission is found to be Plagiarized,
a. Student maybe subjected to disciplinary action
b. Student has to redo the project by registering to the
project by paying the full fees.
2500
Yes
I or U
Payment Category Waiver Grade
2500
Yes
1000
No
Actual grade
Actual grade
MONTH 4
2500
Yes
U
2500
Yes
U

12.2 Course structure suitable for online delivery
All courses of 4 credits will be of duration 12 weeks.
The recorded content which is released every week will be for a total of about 2-4 hours, split
into multiple lectures which includes the theory and tutorial videos. All videos are copyrighted
to IIT Madras but will be available on YouTube as a public playlist for anyone to access and
view.
Self test assessments for every video lecture, a practice assignment for the week with
solutions will also be released apart from text transcripts and any related notes.
The weekly graded assignment will also be released along with the above content.
12.3 Evaluation and grading of courses in every term
Each course has 3 types of assessments - online weekly assignments, monthly in-person
proctored quizzes and an in-person end term exam.
1. Online assignments:
- A 12 week course will have one or more weekly assignments to be submitted online
within the due date specified.
- The average score of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignments given during the
course run should be >= 40/100 to be eligible to write the final exam and get the hall
ticket for the same.
- This will also contribute to the Final score and course grade.(Score in any unattempted
assignment will be counted as 0).
- May change from course to course - check the grading document for actual details
2. 2 proctored Quizzes - to be attempted in person in the city chosen
Two quizzes will be conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8 based on the content of
Weeks 1-4 and 1-8 respectively.
- Will be a single session exam with 4 hrs to attempt 4 subjects, 3 hrs to attempt 3
subjects and 2 hrs to attempt 2 or 1 subject.
- The Qualifier score will be counted as Quiz 1 score for the courses registered in
the Foundation level only in the subsequent term of the qualifier exam, unless the
candidate attempts Quiz 1 again in which case the better of the 2 scores will be
used for calculations.
- The score of a quiz not attempted will be taken as 0. No make-up quiz will be
provided.
- At least one of the 2 quizzes has to be mandatorily attended by the candidate else
he/she will not be eligible to write the final exam. (check grading document for
changes)
3. Final end term exam at the end of the course

- At the end of a term, there will be an end term exam of 1.5 hours duration for each
course. (This will ensure exams can be conducted only on Sundays and exams for 4
courses completed in 2 sessions of 3 hrs each throughout the program.)
- Eligibility to write the End sem exam: Pls check the grading document for details.
- The final exam score accounts for 50% of the Total Course Score T - called End
Semester Score (E)
12.4 Pass criteria for each course
Total Course Score (T) will be the sum of all assessment components in every course as
defined in the Grading document of that term.
A candidate is deemed to have passed a course IF Total Course Score (T) >= 40/100
This criteria is the same for all learners in the course.
An absolute grading system, as described in the following table, will be followed:
Condition satisfied by
Status
‘T’ - Total Course Score (Out Of 100)
(T ≥ 90)
(90 > T ≥ 80)
(80 > T ≥ 70)
(70 > T ≥ 60)
(60 > T ≥ 50)
(50 > T >= 40)
(T < 40)
Weekly average assignment score
<40/100
or 0 quizzes attended - (Not eligible to
write the final exam)
Complete ET alone in next term;
OPPE will NOT be scheduled.
GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be carried
over OR Repeat the entire course
Complete ET and OPE in next term, Both
oppes will be scheduled.
GA and quiz marks will be carried over
OR Repeat the entire course
Complete OPE alone in next term, Both
oppes will be scheduled. GA, quiz and ET
marks will be carried over OR Repeat the
entire course
Incomplete
(Absent in ET
alone)
Incomplete
(Absent in both
ET & OPPE)
Incomplete
(Absent/fail in
OPPE)
I_OP
-
I_BOTH
-
I
-
Pass
Pass
Pass
Pass
Pass
Pass
Fail
Fail
Letter Grade
S
A
B
C
D
E
U
WA/WQ
Grade point
10
9
8
7
6
4
0
0

12.5 Repeating a course
1. For improvement
A learner can repeat a course for improvement in grades any number of times. The fee
for repeating the course for improvement will be twice the regular course fee and the
learner will have to submit all the weekly assignments, appear for the quizzes and final
exams. The highest score amongst all attempts for a course will be used for calculating
the CGPA.
2. If learner was not eligible to attempt the end term exam (grade=WA/WQ) or if the
learner did not pass the course (Grade = U)
If average assignment score < 40/100 or no quiz attended or T<40/100, the learner
has to repeat the entire course. This includes submission of assignments and redoing
all the subsequent quizzes and the end term exam. Fees for repeating the course is
the same as the course fees.
3. If the learner was absent for the final exam alone (grade = I): The learner has 2
options:
a.
Reappear for the final term exam - Makeup exam: They can attend only the
end term exam whenever it is conducted in the subsequent term.
● The fee to repeat an end term exam will be Rs.1000 for each course of the
foundational level and Rs. 2000 for each course of the diploma / degree
levels.
● If the learner reattempts the course in the immediate next term, then the
average Quiz Score Q will be carried over and the learner does not have to
resubmit the quizzes or the assignments.
● If the learner wishes to skip the immediate next term and attempt the
course in subsequent terms, then the entire course will have to be repeated
including the weekly assignments and quizzes.
● A learner can reappear for the makeup exam only once. If the learner
misses the makeup exam, then the learner has to repeat the entire course
in the term thereafter, by paying the full course fees and repeating all
assignments, invigilated quizzes and the end term exam.
b.
Repeat the entire course: They can choose to repeat the entire course.
● The fee to repeat the course will be the same as the regular course fees.
● The learner must complete all assignments, invigilated quizzes and the end
term exam.
● Registering to this course will be counted as one of the courses permitted
as per the CCC of the learner.
Note: Learners repeating a course for any reason must do so within the time and term limits:
● Each level must be completed within 36 months (3 years / 9 terms).
● The entire programme must be completed within 96 months (8 years / 24 terms).

12.5.1 Registering for Courses: Term 2 Onwards
● Maximum number of final exams (full course+makeup exams) <= 4
● Maximum number of new + repeat full course (if failed/absent if reqd/improvement) <=
CCC
● Registering for new courses is subject to fulfilment of all rules and prerequisites.
● If a student passes all/some courses then CCC is calculated on the average of passed
courses.
● If a student fails all courses, then CCC is set to 2.
● If a student is absent for all courses then CCC of the previous term is carried forward.
● Make up exam will be permitted as an option only once in the subsequent term.
12.5.2 Repeating a Course - WA, WQ, U or I grade
Applicable for courses with WA, WQ, U or I grade.
You can choose to repeat courses in a single term or across multiple terms. You can also
register for new courses in the term. The total number of courses must be within the CCC
limit. Learners with an Incomplete (I) grade in a course can take a Make Up Exam instead of
repeating the course.
12.5.3 Repeating a Course for Improvement
Applicable for courses with S, A, B, C, D or E grade.
You can choose to repeat courses to improve the grade in the course. The highest grade will
be recorded in the transcript. The total number of courses must be within the CCC limit.
Course fee Repeat for Improvement courses will be double the normal fee. Improvement
courses can be registered at any level. Eg: Foundation course improvement can be registered
at diploma level.
Note: It is recommended that learners try and progress with new courses instead of repeating
courses for improvement, unless a learner deems it absolutely necessary or needs to improve
their learning of a course. All course material of completed courses are available to the learner
throughout the course.
Please write to support to get an improvement gform. Students have to mandatorily
apply for any new course or RKA in course registration form. We will not accept gform
entry alone.
12.5.4 Make Up Exams
Applicable for courses with I grade.
You can choose to take a Makeup Exam for a course with Incomplete (I) grade. Learners will
only be required to reappear for the Final Exam for that course. The Makeup Exam does not
count towards CCC, but a student can appear for a maximum of FOUR final exams in a term.
If you have already registered for 4 courses, you do not have any more final exam slots
available.

Note: The grading pattern for make-up exams will be as follows: the pattern used will be as
per the formula used in the term the course work was done and not as per the term the
makeup exam was taken.
Quick Reckoner Table
COURSE PASS
STATUS
Passed all
Failed any/all
Absent for all
final exams
Passed + Absent
Failed + Absent
Repeating OPPE:
OPE1/OPE2
Absent
ET
Absent
T
-
Grade
U
Condition for
OPPE/course reg
Foundation Diploma
Repeat the entire course Course Fee
Complete OPE alone in
>=35
Absent
Present
<35
U
I
next term, GA, quiz and ET
marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course
Repeat the entire course Course Fee
Complete OPE alone in
>=40
Present
Present
score< x/100
<40
Absent
-
>=40
Present
score> x/100
Present
<40
U
I
Actual
grade
U
Repeat the entire course Course Fee
Repeat OPPE and ET OR
Repeat Entire course
PASS (depending on
course criteria)
2000
Course Fee
Repeat entire course Course Fee
I
next term, GA, quiz and ET
marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course
Course
Fee
4000
Course
Fee
Course
Fee
1000
2000
Course
Fee
1000
2000
Course
Fee
New Course
Allowed?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Repeat
Course?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Take Make Up
Exam?
Not recommended
but available

Absent
-
I
Repeat ET alone OR
Repeat Entire course
1000
2000
● OPPE will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating ET alone.
● ET will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating OPPE alone.
● Students who registered for repeating OPPE & ET will have to appear for OPPE1,
OPPE2 & ET.
Registered Category
ET alone
OPPE alone
ET + OPPE
OPPE
No OPPE will be conducted
Both OPPE will be conducted
Both OPPE will be conducted
12.6 Dropping a course (This is not applicable for the students who are
continuing after qualifier in the same term)
Once the registration window closes in any term, adding courses will not be allowed.
Dropping a course will be allowed within 4 weeks of the term start date and not
beyond. Rs 2000 will be deducted if a Foundation level course is dropped and Rs
4000 will be deducted if a Diploma/Degree level course is dropped.
a.
If the learner decides to drop out of the programme completely using the “I quit
the programme” option, the course fee paid minus the deduction will be
refunded to the learner and the learner will be removed from the programme,
cancelling his official email id access. The status will also be changed to “Quit
the programme”.
b.
If the learner drops one/a few of the courses registered to in a term, the refund
will be made as given in the table below but the email id will be kept active so
that he/she can continue with other ongoing courses and the programme.
Status will be “Active”.
c.
If the learner opts to drop all courses registered in a term, the refund will be
done as per the table given below and the email id will be kept active so that
the learner can come in and register in the next term. But this will be counted
as a term with 0 courses. Status will be changed to “Academic probation”.
d.
e.
The fee receipt will be generated post these 4 weeks after term start when drop
is permitted so that all the courses and fees are tallied and confirmed.
Learners writing exams outside India would have paid Exam facilitation Fee
while registering for the courses. For such learners:
i.
If they drop from all courses in a term, 100% of the facilitation fee for
Quiz 1 will be retained while 50% of the facilitation fee for quizzes 2 and
final exam will be refunded.

Paid
Level
Foundation
4000
2000
1000
Diploma/Degree
Project Course
10000
5000
2500
2500
Retained by IITM
as Admin charges
2000
2000
2000
4000
4000
4000
500
Refund
2000
0
0
6000
1000
0
2000
Please note, The amount to be refunded will be added to your student wallet and NOT refunded to the
bank account. This amount can be used when you register for courses in the next term and deducted
from the fees to be paid then.
13. Learning paths available
Here are some suggested learning paths...
1. Foundation course certificate
2. Diploma in Programming
3. Diploma in Data Science
4. Diploma in Programming and Data Science
5. BSc degree in Programming and Data Science
Shortest
Term
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Term 1
Term 2
Term 3
Term 1
Term 2
Term 3
Term 1
Term 2
Term 3
Year 4 Term 1
Foundatio
n
3
2
3
Plan for One
Diploma
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
Plan for Both
the Diplomas
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
BSc Degree BS Degree
2
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
2
3
Path for BSc
Degree
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
3

Term 2
Term 3
2
1
Total Courses
8
14
20
13.1 Prerequisite course requirements
Foundation courses
Level
Foundation
Course
Maths 1
Statistics 1
English 1
CT
Maths 2
Statistics 2
English 2
Pre-req
-
-
-
-
Maths 1
Statistics 1
English 1
Intro to python CT
A co-requisite for Statistics-2 is Maths-2. So either Maths-2 has to be done before statistics-2
or both can be taken together. Statistics-2 cannot be done without having done Maths-2.
All the 8 Foundation courses should be completed before the candidate can register to any
Year 2 Diploma level course.
Diploma level courses
Level
Maths2
Coreq
-
-
-
-
2
3
31
2
3
31
Course
Diploma in DS MLF
BDM
MLT
MLP
BA
TDS
Diploma in Prog DBMS
PDSA
-
-
App dev 1 -
Java
-
App dev 2 App dev 1
SC
-
Pre-req
-
-
MLT, MLF
BDM
MLF
-
-
DBMS
-
-
Coreq
-
-
MLF

Without completing all the 8 Foundation courses and the 12 Diploma level courses + 4
project courses, one cannot proceed to register for Year 3 Degree level courses.
Degree Level Courses:
an 2025|CourseFee
Please note that L5_Degree courses are complex compared to Degree and L4_Degree courses. Course
fee and credits are same as L4_Degree courses.
14. Changes in project grading (wef now) and
Eligibility to enter the BSc Level (wef May 2024)
Here are two changes being effected with respect to project grading and eligibility to
enter the degree level.
1. Project grading:
So far - students had to complete all feature requirements given for a project, pass the
L1 viva and move onto the L2 viva and pass that too to get a pass grade.
Looking into the data we have, we understand that all students may not be equally
proficient in the areas of programming, machine learning and business and excel in all
4 projects.
Hence the grading is being changed as follows:
MAD1, MAD2, MLP projects: WEF current term

1. For MAD1 and MAD2 projects, when the submitted Application passes the check for
Appdev, L1 viva will be scheduled.
For MLP project, if the cutoff is crossed in the Kaggle contest and the student declares
that all the models have been completed, the L1 viva is scheduled.
2. There are 2 cutoff marks that will be decided for the L1 level for each term:
a. Cutoff1: X, Cutoff2: Y;
b. X<Y, X>0
3. The L1 viva will be conducted and scoring will be done based on the rubrics defined for
it. Based on the marks scored in L1 viva (L1_S), the following are the possibilities:
a. If (L1_S < X): Student has to resubmit the project. A few days are given for
them to resubmit in the same term. If the second time also, L1_S<X, they will
have to redo the project in the next term.
b. If (X <= L1_S < Y), then students are asked some additional questions for
assessing their knowledge and awarded D or E grade. Such students do not go
in for L2 viva at all. They will have a pass grade.
c. If (L1_S >= Y), L2 viva is scheduled for them.
i.
If they pass the viva cutoff for L2, they get a grade including L1 and L2
scores.
ii.
iii.
If they do not pass the L2 viva cutoff, they get one more chance at L2
viva.
If they do not pass in the second attempt at L2 viva, they get an
appropriate grade (C or D or E) based on their L1 performance alone.
BDM project evaluation
So far: The process has been identifying the business, collecting data, analysing and sharing
their insights.
Going forward from Jan 2024:
Students will be allowed to web scrape data and analyse it, sharing the source from where the
data was taken. The BDM team will outline the steps involved.The maximum grade that the
student can earn in this case will be D.
Eligibility for entering degree level of the program: WEF May 2024
● For a student to progress to the degree level (BSc) of the Data Science and
Applications program:
● they must secure a CGPA of 6.0 or higher at the end of two diplomas (includes
the courses in the foundation level and the diploma level and the projects)
● AND a CGPA of 7.0 or higher in all the projects completed at the diploma level.
● These CGPA requirements are not applicable to students who exit the program with
the diploma(s).
● Such students who exit the program with the diploma(s) without meeting either CGPA

criteria will not be eligible for any certificates of academic achievements or prizes.
● Students can repeat the theory courses any number of times within the stipulated
period for diploma level to improve the overall CGPA.
● Students who have overall CGPA of 6.0 or above and CGPA<7.0 in projects, which
prevents them from entering the degree level, will be given one additional opportunity
to improve their project grades to earn the eligibility to progress to the degree level.
● Students who cannot improve their CGPA above the required cut-offs must exit the
program with the diploma(s).
● This rule shall be applicable to all students entering the degree level (BSc) from the
May 2024 term.
For those students who completed diplomas with less than 4 standalone projects (in Sep
2021/Jan 2022 terms projects were included in theory courses), whatever projects were done
standalone will be counted for the average CGPA of 7.0. For example, if 2 projects were done
as part of the theory and 2 projects standalone, then only the grades in the two standalone
projects will be used to compute the project CGPA. The projects done as part of the theory
courses will not be counted.
For those who do 4 standalone projects, eligibility to enter degree level is illustrated below with
some examples:
P1
E
E
D
D
D
P2
E
E
E
D
D
P3
S
S
S
S/A/B
C
P4
S
A
S/A/B
S/A/B
C
Total points
28
27
30/29/28
28-32
26
Eligible to enter the degree level?
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
15. New Rules for Foundation & Diploma Level Completion
15.1 Foundation level checkpoints:
These conditions shall be applicable to the students admitted to the foundation level
from May 2024. These are not applicable for students who have entered in Jan 2024
term or before that.
Students will be removed from the program if they do not complete
a. at least 4 courses within 4 terms.
b. at least 6 courses within 6 terms.
c. the 8 foundation courses within 9 terms.

The student will be issued warnings about insufficient progress and about complying with
these conditions starting from term 3.
15.2 Change in CCC at the foundation level:
This is for ALL students in the foundation level.
Currently, the CCC is calculated based on the courses passed in the last 2 terms by the
students and enforced too, deciding the number of courses that students can take in a given
term in the Foundation Level.
In view of the conditions imposed above leading to exit from the program if not satisfied, it was
proposed that the CCC will only be a recommendation and not enforced. This will enable
students to make up for term breaks and meet the proposed course completion criteria.
15.3 Increasing the maximum number of terms for completing the diploma level
The Diploma level can now be completed in a maximum of 12 terms instead of 9 terms
as has been the case till now. This extension of 12 terms as the maximum limit to
complete the Diploma level shall be applied for all learners, starting from the first batch,
who started the Diploma Level in September 2021.
The maximum duration for the BSc and BS levels shall remain unchanged at 9 terms. The
total duration permissible for the BSc and BS degrees shall also remain at 6 and 8 years,
respectively.
15.4 Checkpoints in the Diploma level
These conditions below shall be applicable to the students admitted to the Diploma
level from May 2024. These are not applicable for students who have entered in Jan
2024 term or before that.
To ensure continuous progress and steer students towards completing courses on time, the
following intermediate checkpoints were also proposed. The student must complete
a. at least 3 courses and 1 project in the first 3 terms from starting the Diploma
level - if not, they will be put on academic probation and given a warning.
b. at least 6 courses and 2 projects in the first 6 terms from starting the Diploma
level - if not, they will be removed from the program.
c. at least 9 courses and 3 projects in the first 9 terms from starting the Diploma
level - if not, they will be removed from the program.
d. All 12 courses and 4 projects in 12 terms from starting the Diploma level - if not,
they will be removed from the program
The student will be issued sufficient alerts and warnings about these checkpoints.
16. Eligibility Criteria Prize
The Direct admission to the Diploma, where students exit with the Diploma, comprises 8
courses and 2 projects (35 credits).
Eligibility for Prizes:

1. Certificate of Merit
Awarded to students at 2 levels: completing Foundation+2 Diplomas (86 credits),
completing the BS degree (142 credits)
Criteria: CGPA between 9.00 and 9.50 at the end of Foundation+2 Diplomas or when
graduating with BS.
2. Certificate of Academic Distinction
Awarded to students at 2 levels: completing Foundation+2 Diplomas (86 credits) or
completing the BS degree (142 credits)
Criteria: All students with CGPA greater than 9.50 at the end of Foundation+2 Diplomas
or when graduating with BS.
3. Certificate of Academic Excellence
Awarded to students at 2 levels: completing Foundation+2 Diplomas (86 credits) or
completing the BS degree (142 credits)
Criteria: The students with the highest CGPA at the end of Foundation+2 Diplomas or
when graduating with BS will be identified and awarded. The actual number of students
will be decided by the Steering committee.
Such students will be awarded a medal along with the certificate.
The following will be the process followed for identifying the students eligible for the awards:
a. The list of students completing the foundation+2 diplomas or the BS degree in a
calendar year January-December will be consolidated and considered to finalize the
prizes.
b. Certificates will be awarded for the 3 categories with medals being given for the students
identified as having the highest CGPA alone.
c. The students completing Diplomas through the Direct admission process will be
considered as a separate category and will be eligible for prizes in the highest CGPA
category alone.
Prize Eligibility Criteria for Improvement Courses
We will consider the CGPA for prizes only till the term when the student completed 2
diploma’s. We will not consider the courses if the student registers as improvement after they
have completed both diplomas.
Eg: Student registered foundation/diploma course as improvement in May 2023 but completed
both diplomas in Jan 2023, then the CGPA secured in JAN 2023 will be considered for prize.
17. Apprenticeship in the BS level of IIT
Madras’ BS in Data Science and Applications
The program provides the students in the BS level of the program to pursue an apprenticeship
with companies and research projects and earn up to 12 credits in this level. Doing an
apprenticeship is optional.

Steps involved in the Apprenticeship program:
1. Approval for the company/research project where the student can work as an
apprentice
If the student applies and is accepted by any of the companies that are preapproved
by IITM for this purpose, the apprenticeship will be directly approved.
Else the student will have to submit the details of the company/organization and the
Apprenticeship committee will decide based on the details submitted.
2. Reporting Manager
Once the apprenticeship is approved, the student has to submit the details of the
Reporting Manager in the Organization to IITM.
3. Logging the weekly work report
Student has to file the work log to IITM BS office every week.
4. Review after first 4 weeks
After 4 weeks, based on the student’s performance, the reporting manager has to
confirm if they would like to continue with the student as an apprentice for the next 7
months. This confirmation letter should be submitted to the IITM BS Program’s Office.
5. Possible exit after 4 months
After the completion of 4 months, the student or the company can choose to
discontinue the apprenticeship. A letter from the company has to be submitted
outlining the work done by the student and whether it was satisfactory to obtain partial
credits.
6. After the completion of 8 months of internship
A letter from the Reporting Manager should be submitted to the IITM BS program on
the company’s letterhead stating the work done by the student and whether it was
satisfactory.
The following will be norms with respect to pursuing an apprenticeship:
1. Number of courses that can be taken along while pursuing the apprenticeship
Students can pursue a maximum of 2 courses each term during the duration of the
apprenticeship.
2. Duration of the apprenticeship that can be credited - 8 months, full time
3. Academic Credits
a. <4 months: 0 credits.
b. 4<duration<8 months: 4 credits
c. 8 months: 12 credits

4. Stipend: This is mutually agreed upon between the student and the company when
finalizing the apprenticeship.
5. Mode of apprenticeship: Remote or On-site: This will depend on the company’s
policy.
6. Pre-placement Offer: On successful completion of the apprenticeship, companies will
have the option to give a pre-placement offer to the students.
7. Payment of fees:
The fee for credit transfer is fixed as Rs 5000/- per credit for Apprenticeship. When
students opt to credit this at the BS level, they have to pay the credit transfer fee at the
time of registration.
Please refer the link to know more about Apprenticeship:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQ_ZCTw1_PzVDBJ7u-wX18KUgl-IK
1POIYRvyjAYsj_A-tS99K7ARRuNVKk0tp34B1woqclNxvY_0Lc/pub
18. Software and Hardware Requirements -
Mandatory System Specifications
The following are the essential requirements that are recommended to pursue the BSc Degree
program from IIT Madras1. Please note that there will be updates in some of the specifications
with changes happening in technology.
Hardware
To enroll and study in the program, every student is required to have a laptop or desktop with
the minimum configuration being as follows:
1. RAM Size - 8 GB or higher (The ability to install more memory is desirable).
2. Processor - Intel 8th Generation or AMD 4th Generation or upwards or its equivalent
(The latest processor configuration is always recommended)
3. Storage - Minimum of 500 GB, Desirable of 1 TB. Having an SSD storage is desirable.
4. Screen size and resolution - Minimum of 13” for laptop and Minimum of 15” for desktop
with 1080p
5. Webcamera, a mic and speaker or an earphone/headphone with mic.
Software/Applications
1. Operating System - Minimum requirement of Windows 10 or Ubuntu LTS Version
20.04 (or any equivalent) or Mac OS Mojave. Having the capability of dual boot is
desirable. If there is no capability for dual boot, then the operating system must
support virtualization software like VirtualBox using which Ubuntu 20.04 can be
emulated. The System Commands course in Semester 4 will be taught primarily on
Ubuntu 20.04.
2. Browser - Latest version of Chrome with Google Account signed in
1

3. Basic familiarity with Google Suite of tools (Docs, Sheets and Slides), specifically
collaboration features.
4. Any other software that is specified within the course
Internet Bandwidth
Minimum of 2 MBPS connection is required to attend sessions without disruptions. However
we strongly recommend broadband connections with much higher bandwidth for the best
learning experience.
For Online Interactions/Proctored Examinations
1. Browser - Latest version of Chrome is desirable
2. Mobile with a front camera and good internet connection (VOLTE connections are
ideal)
3. Mic and speaker to be able to speak to and listen to the person at the other end
4. Any applications as required to be installed for the interactions/examinations
System compatibility test
All students have to mandatorily attend the system compatibility test and ensure that the
system you have conforms to the above requirements and student has to participate in this on
the dates mentioned by the Admin team to get this completed.
Other References
Some more helpful links that will help you in understanding possible system configurations:
1. https://towardsdatascience.com/20-necessary-requirements-of-a-perfect-laptop-for-dat
a-science-and-machine-learning-tasks-7d0c59c3cb63
2. https://www.practicaldatascience.org/html/buying_datascience_computer.html
3. https://www.umass.edu/it/support/hardware/recommended-minimum-computer-configu
rations-windows
4. https://www.du.edu/it/support/how-to/students/laptops
5. https://wmich.edu/cs/laptop-requirements
